Hello.
Welcome to week eight of LA.
, I hope the course is going well so far.
, this week, , is a very important week because
it's, , a week in which we look back at
some results that we have already started in the course,
and we extend it to more general structures.
We know about linear transformation in R2 and R3, and
we know about vector orthogonality in R2 and R3.
But this week we're going to extend that to our
end.
And this is really what mathematics is about.
, recycling , properties and objects and things that we
know already in familiar spaces and translate that onto something
that is more complicated.
So even if we do not have any geometric insight
about what our N looks , because it goes beyond
what we can model with our everyday experience, because we
live in three dimension.
Mathematics allows us to write interesting results and interesting properties
beyond that by using what we know.
So to be a little bit more specific, this week
is divided, as you know, in two lessons today we
will do dot product orthogonality length Cauchy-Schwarz distances, triangle inequality
and tomorrow will all be about similarity Eigen eigenvectors eigenvalues
and eigenspaces.
I have covered these topics in videos.
This time I put them in the reading.
Can you just tell me did the video work?
Okay.
Because last time we had some problems because they were
in the reading quiz.
Yes.
Yes.
It was included in the reading.
In the reading instructions.
Is that.
Is this creating any confusion?
Okay.
, okay.
So, , let's start.
So the structure of today's, , of today's lesson will
be the usual one.
We're going to do some exercises on this content.
And , so let's start by logging in into the
book club of the, of the , of the lesson
please.
I'm just going to split the screen so I can
continue on one.
And and we jump straight into into that.
, with the first question that I will open on
bookclub in a moment, I'll give you some more time
to scan the QR code.
And the first question we start very simple.
, I give you the length of two vectors and
the value of the scalar product.
And then I'm asking you for the length of some
linear combination of the two of the two vectors.
And what I ask you to do is To input
the value, the numerical value of that expression based on
the length of the vector and their scalar product.
I'll give you a few minutes to think about it.
Sketch down some calculations.
You can then enter the number directly in bookclub, and
then we will go it together through it.
And then sort of halfway through, I will drop a
hint to let you know how to do that.
Okay.
Okay, so the first questions are in.
I can see that zero and six are the two
most common ones.
I'm just going to drop the hint right now.
, in the reading for today, there was a formula
that you might find useful, which is , the one
from example, 5.3.2, which gives you the, , the expression
for what we're trying to calculate.
Okay.
So zero and six seem to be the most common
values that you come up with.
, let's go through this together, shall we?
, we can simply apply the, , property that, ,
we, we just saw.
And the idea here is that, , the linear combination
splits up in two contributions.
One that depends only on the length of the vectors
and one that depends on the other scalar product.
And then we can calculate each term independently.
And if you run through the calculation six was indeed
the correct answer.
So , very well done, most of you.
, just one thing that I noticing someone put in
minus six.
, now, I don't want to pick on you, but,
, I'm asking for a square length.
Okay?
So immediately negative values should be discarded because, .
, because length are defined positive already.
, or rather non-negative because the length can be zero.
When is the length zero?
There's only one vector whose length is zero.
Yes, the length is always positive unless the vector is
zero, in which case is zero, so it's non-negative.
But then we square it as well.
So something squared is also non-negative by definition.
okay.
Let prove this.
, this proposition which was , in the reading.
Let me just switch back.
, full screen.
, we have , the proposition A x plus b
length squared equals to that.
, how would you approach proving this?
Can you throw some ideas at me?
Yes.
yes.
We write the length as the.
Yes, we use the definition of the length, which is
defined in terms of the dot of the of the
dot product.
So we know that the length is defined as the
square root of the dot product of the vector with
itself.
So squared length will just be the dot product with
the vector with itself.
And then we can distribute the dot product between axe
plus b and itself.
And we get all the terms that, , that we
want.
Except now these two terms here are now expressed in
the terms of the dot product.
But no harm is done because then we can move
back with the definition of length, , to get the
result that we wanted.
Okay.
So the square length of, , I don't remember what
it was, was two x minus three y was six
for that reason, the length itself was the square root
of that.
Okay.
Do you have any questions about this?
, this first this first question.
Okay, excellent.
So let's move on to the second one.
Let me switch back to half and half.
And now now I'm going to close this though because
I don't want you to peek at this.
The next question is a staple of Allah.
You know this format I put in some statements.
Some are true, some are false.
I made them up, or I corrupted some true statements
that were in the reading.
And it's your job to identify which ones are true
and which ones are not.
And then we will go through through them one by
one, and we will comment on why each one is
true or false.
So I'll give you a few minutes to think about
this.
And then, .
Then we will go through them together.
Okay, I see that almost 60 people have come in
with their question.
I'll give you one more minute to think about so
we can maybe get to 100.
Okay, we're almost there.
95 answers.
Let's have a look at the other answers.
Okay, so, , we have one, two.
And for being clearly in the lead for what you
think are the correct ones.
Three is fairly, , is a fairly shared opinion that
three is false and five mostly, but, , not really.
Okay.
, I can already tell that you're doing well, but
let's go through them one by one just for the
fun of it.
, statement one was every orthogonal set in n is
linearly independent.
You got most true.
, and this is in fact true.
You had a actually a theorem in the reading, ,
that says exactly this.
And, , let's try to talk for a few seconds.
Why is that?
, linearly independent means that any linear combination is zero
if and only.
Well, if a linear combination is zero, then the coefficient
must be zero.
There's no way of combining the sets with non-zero
coefficients such that they they they returned the zero vector.
And why is orthogonality important here?
Well, because if all the vectors are two by two,
, are pairwise orthogonal, then there is no way of
cancelling out a vector with any of the others,
because all the others give an orthogonal component with respect
to that vector in the set, and so to get
zero we need to.
We need to zero out the coefficient of the vector,
giving out that first and that first that first direction.
This is the intuitive part.
, now let's try and prove it in a way
that it's a little bit more formal.
That was just, , me trying to give you the
idea and hand-waving it a little bit.
, okay.
, as I mentioned before, we want to show that
the set is linearly independent.
And so we need to take the linear combination and
set it equal to zero.
And we need to show that that implies t1 TC
must be zero.
Okay.
How can we isolate a direction.
Well that's what the scalar product is for.
So we can take the dot product of both sides
of the equation with x1.
So we're we know that the scalar product is
in a way a projection, and so we are projecting
the equation along the direction of x1.
And then my intuitive argument of before now will apply
in the sense that now that we have projected the
equation onto the direction of x1, x1 will be the
only one giving us contribution.
So if we want to cancel out the contribution in
that direction, we will need to we that will force
T1 to zero.
And then we can repeat projecting it around onto all
the vectors.
And because they're all pairwise orthogonal, then we will get
all of the coefficients of the linear combination equal to
zero.
Hence the vectors are linearly independent.
And this is really the concept of the proof.
Here I just formalise it a little bit.
And we have projected the equation by taking the dot
product with x1 on both sides, and everything goes away
because the vectors are pairwise orthogonal except the very first
term here.
.
The vector.
This is the only the only one that's surviving.
And so we have zero equals t the length of
x one.
But, , x one cannot be zero because that's come
from the definition of being of being orthogonal.
Vectors are orthogonal if they're dot if their dot product
is zero but the vectors are non-zero.
So in here we already have the hypothesis that all
these vectors are non-zero.
And so the length is different from zero.
And then t one is equal from a is equal
to zero.
And then we project to t2 and this is on
x two.
And this will be the only one surviving.
And then we do that k times onto dk.
And we get that all the coefficients needs to be
zero.
Hence the set is linearly independent.
Excellent.
Any questions about this proof?
Okay.
, yeah, I forgot to put that on screen.
We just repeat everything k times.
Okay.
Statement.
True.
Was, , the most widely loved, , the standard basis
or orthonormal?
And, yes, that is, of course, true.
That's part of the reason why it's taken as the
standard base.
And there's not really a proof here.
We just need to think about how these, , vectors
are constructed and then take the dot product between them.
And we will see that the dot product is equal
to one.
If we're taking the same two vectors and is equal
to zero if the two vectors are different from each
other.
And the reason is, well, of course, if it's the
same vector, the scalar product will be zero plus 0.0
plus zero.
But then the two ones meet at the same place.
We get plus one plus zero.
And everything works out as one.
If they're different, the two ones are in different positions,
so each one will be multiplied by the corresponding zero
and the whole dot product will be zero.
Okay.
Any questions about the orthonormal base.
Okay.
next one.
, the length of a vector is the sum of
its components in modulo.
Of course, because the length needs to be, , equal
or greater than zero.
And as you, as most of you, 93% of you
correctly identify, this is actually false.
And why is that?
Why is this wrong?
Anyone?
It should be discarded of the squares.
Yes.
Thank you very much for that.
That is a corruption of the correct formula, which looks
this.
, and there's really nothing to add here.
I just took the took the definition and made it
wrong in a way that could look vaguely correct because
both sides are greater than zero, but there's nothing more
to that.
Okay.
And then statement for if the dot product of two
vectors is equal to the product of their length.
Here I missed a balding formula.
Then the two vectors are multiples of each other.
You are most of you identifying this as true and
that is indeed correct.
Can I ask you why?
Or where where where did you take this result from?
Sorry.
You can find that cosine of theta equals one because.
That's not why you could not do that.
Yes.
That's that's a way of doing it which is contained
in the proof of the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.
Or you can just use the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.
The second part of the Schwarz inequality says that the
the equality.
In consequence.
We will see that later.
So don't don't worry.
Is is actually inequality if and only if the vectors
are multiple from each other.
And normally it's right the other way around it's red.
If the vectors are multiple of each other, then that
equality is true.
But actually it's an if and only if.
And that was the point of this statement.
It works both ways.
Okay, so it's enough to check that the dot product
between two vectors is equal to the product of the
lengths to show that they are collinear, essentially.
Okay.
, so yeah, this is, , , this wrong is
within , is within quotes because it's just the unusual
way of reading it.
But if and only if work both ways.
Okay.
, so I want to take a break of ,
10s before going to statement five and, , remind you
of the whole of Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.
As you probably can tell from the videos that hopefully
you've watched the first video.
I really stress how important Cauchy-Schwarz is not only in
linear algebra, but across mathematics.
, it's just a very convenient way.
In mathematics.
We need to bound things all the time.
And the dot product is also very common in mathematics.
And so any inequality that bounds cross product is very
useful.
And I'm sure you will see 101 ways of applying
Cauchy-Schwarz in future courses.
So just something to, , keep with you, , from
this course here.
Okay.
, statement five was, , was this one the length
of x minus z is equal to the length of
x minus y plus y minus plus the length of
y minus z.
And most of you correctly identified this as false.
And why is it false?
What did I corrupt here?
Because there you are saying that for each triangle, ,
the length of one side is equal to the sum
of the other two lengths.
Yes.
It's actually an.
Inequality.
Yeah, that's exactly what what what I'm saying is, I'm
saying taking two sides of a triangle is as long
as taking the third one, which is not wrong.
How do I make it right?
Just.
Yeah, I just put a smaller and equal two there.
, and, , and I get the triangle inequality, which
is part of, , of today's topics.
And, , a note that that, , that, , equality,
, applies if the three vectors are collinear.
I'm missing.
I'm missing something here.
I need to have both z and y a multiple
of x, because then the vectors are on the same
line, and therefore doing the two sides of the degenerate
triangle that all lies onto a single line is equal
to take the third one.
Okay, so if they're all collinear, then, , my claim
here in statement five would actually work.
Okay, so now, , this is, , the most difficult
things the size of today.
So after this one, it's all going to be downhill.
No worries.
, I've come up with three vectors in R5, which
is a is an unusually large vector space.
So that's why that's part of the reason why this
exercise is complicated.
And what I want to do here is to create,
, orthogonal set in R5.
So I want to take vectors from this set as
many as I want.
And I want to add vectors in such a way
that I have five, , , orthogonal vectors in R5.
And , the question is how many parameters do I
need to express the generic vector that are perpendicular to
all three vectors?
Okay, so I have these three vectors in R5.
And what I want to do is to essentially complete
the orthogonal set.
So I want to account for the remaining dimensions which
are not taken up by this set.
And I'm asking you, , how many how many
parameters do I need to achieve that?
And the answer to this question, actually, let me hide
them very quickly, is you can have, , well, you
will see it on your device, but do I need
one parameter, two parameters, three parameters or four parameters?
I appreciate this question is a bit more complicated than
usual, so if it's not clear what I'm asking, I'm
happy to repeat and go over it again.
, has.
Is everyone clear with my request.
Okay.
If you have any question, just raise your hand.
I'll give you probably five minutes for this one because
this one is tough.
Okay, I'll come around.
So stop me if you have any questions.
So, , just to clarify things a little bit further,
if anyone has still any doubt.
, nobody came up with any question, but I saw
some confused faces.
A scaled down version of that problem would be number
two.
Same problem, but smaller.
, let's have this vector here.
Zero one the the same question.
How many parameters do we need to express the generic
version for the generic vector perpendicular to this one?
The answer is one, because, , the vectors that are
a multiple of one zero are all and only are
the ones and are all and only the vectors that
are perpendicular to this one in R2.
Okay, so this is the the reasoning that I'm thinking
of that one is just a beefed up version of
this.
Okay, hope that helps with clarifying what I'm after.
Okay, I'm going to give you 30 more seconds to
finish voting now because we have two more questions after
this, which are easy, but I want to take my
time for that as well.
Okay, so last few seconds to submit your answer.
If you're still having voted, we're just about to.
And then we'll go through this together.
, okay.
Let's have a look at what you came up with.
Okay.
so there's a good split between 2 and 3.
, so we can go through this together right now.
But if someone who voted to and someone who voted
three is brave enough to tell me and the class
why they think the other answer is wrong, I would
highly appreciate that.
Completely optional.
You don't have to, but if you voted 2 or
3, which spoiler alerts?
The answer is one of the two and you think
the other one is wrong.
Can you tell me your reasoning?
Yeah.
So just, , just for everyone to hear what he
said.
He said so.
So you voted three.
He voted three.
And he thinks that two is wrong because one of
the vectors in the set is a linear combination of
the other two.
Okay.
I'll leave that to, , to steam for a minute,
maybe try to discuss his observation, and then we will
do a raise of hands between 2 and 3 again.
Okay, so one more minute.
Discuss with that insight.
, is I'm telling you, the answer is not four
is not one.
It's either 2 or 3.
And then we will do a raise of hands.
Okay.
Prepare yourself for your for the hand raising.
, if you think the correct answer is we need
two parameters, please raise your hand now.
Okay.
If you think we need three parameters, raise your hand
now.
Okay.
That's, , less turnout than, , the last election, but
that's good.
Okay, let's, , let's actually go about and do it.
Okay, so that observation, thank you very much was the
winning one.
The answer is in fact, three.
And the reason is exactly that.
It's because the vectors are not linearly independent.
, but actually the third one is equal to the
sum of the two of the first two.
And so in particular, the span, the space of the
span of the two of the three vectors will be
equal to the span of the first two, because the
third one is already in the span putting it ,
in, , in the in the set.
Generating the span doesn't really add anything to the span
itself.
And then there are two ways of thinking about this.
The first one is to think about dimension of subspaces
and dimensions of span.
The dimension of the span is equal to the dimension
of the number of linearly independent vectors.
So it's two and the dimension of the space is
five.
And so how many dimensions are left?
, well, it's five minus two.
So we have three missing dimensions, one parameter per dimension
to parameterise.
, the components along that specific dimension.
And we get three.
And this is an okay way of reasoning if you've
grown familiar enough with how dimension and hyperspace is work,
that's all good.
But if you're, .
I'm sure we can always revert back to solving a
linear system.
Now, the vectors were given in a in a column
format, but we can always transpose them and nothing really
changes.
We just put them in line.
And then we can consider this system here.
Right.
Which is the system created by the first two vectors,
which are the linearly independent ones considered as rows of
an augmented matrix of a system.
And so we have five, , we have five variables
and we have two independent equations.
So how many parameters do we need to give out
the solution.
That will be three parameters okay.
And note that if I was to put the
the third equation in the one given by the
third vector, that wouldn't change, , that wouldn't change the
number of independent equation, because the third one would be
just the sum of the first two, because the vectors,
of course, are in relation with each other.
Okay, so this exercise was to give you an insight
of how dimensions and span and hyper spaces work in
higher dimension, which is exactly what we did here subconsciously
in a.
In essence, this vector here locks in one dimension, the
bottom one, the y dimension.
If we're in our two xy and we need how
many parameters do we need?
Well, we need as many parameters as we have three
dimensions which is one.
It's the x here.
And this works here as well.
Okay.
Do you have any questions.
Right.
So the next question will be something a bit new
at least I've never tried it.
The next book club question is an ordering question without
please, without looking at the words proof on the book,
because that would be very easy.
I have created a blog, proof of the words inequality.
All the passages are in there, but they're all mixed
up.
Can you reorder to create a proof that makes sense?
And that is your next your next task.
So I'll give you a few minutes to think about
this.
Okay, so what I about this exercise, I'm not
going to stop you quite yet, but it really helps
you to think about what logical step you can do
at some point.
And one tip that I give you is be careful
of using quantities or relations that you have not yet
introduced.
That would not give us a logically consistent proof.
So make sure that everything you use in a line
you have either in the hypothesis or you have introduced
it, , in a line above, because that is really
what, , logical consistency, , means in, , in the
context of proofs.
Okay.
30 more seconds to, , finish this task because we
only have ten minutes left and we still have a
question, so I want to spare some time for that
one, even if the last one is very quick.
Okay, we are in 92.
If you can please finish voting, so maybe we can
reach 100 in this question as well then.
That would be great.
9899 100.
Okay, let's have a look at the, , the most
common answers.
So the caveat here is that there's two versions that
works because two steps you can put in.
Either way, it doesn't matter because they're sort of independent.
, okay, I'm going to go through my reconstruction and
then you can, you can check along which, which answer
you, you have put down.
Okay.
What's inequality?
, how does it work?
Well, typically if we check special cases this one,
, if the vectors are zero, we can get rid
of them straight away.
It's a sort of a nuisance that we can deal
with at the beginning.
It's a very simple case.
Get it out straight up.
, straight.
Straight ahead.
So, , we check that if the vectors are the
zero vectors, there's nothing to prove.
We have zero less than or equal than zero, and
everything works.
Okay, so why do we do this?
Well, because then we can assume, , that, , a
is greater than zero and , y is, , Y's
length is greater than zero as well.
Okay.
, now, , this is where the two, , interchangeable,
, lines comes in.
As you can see, there are exactly the same.
I just calculate different quantities with a different sign in
there.
And so by calculating that equal to the cross product,
we can show two different inequalities.
Okay.
And these two lines three and four you could put
in either in either order.
And these are really this is really the core of
the Cauchy-Schwarz proof, because then step five and six are
just tightening up three and four.
And so we have two quantities a, b
minus the, the scalar product greater than equal than zero
and ab plus the scalar product greater than zero.
So by reordering that we can conclude that the scalar
product sits between minus ab and ab, and that is
equivalent to writing the scalar product , smaller than the
absolute value of a and b, which then we can
write as the length.
Bye bye bye.
Point two.
Okay, so here you can see why we did 0.1
at the very beginning, because, , that allows us to
write step six, that the lengths are greater than zero.
So we can divide and move them around without any,
any worries.
Okay, so congratulations.
If you reconstructed the proof correctly and then we can
move to the last question we check out.
Very simple.
It's just a lecture summary.
So it's a multiple choice sort of complete the complete
the the sentence.
I'll give you a couple of minutes and then we
will we will tie up the lecture together , by
going over these, , together.
Okay, maybe we can just do the first one, get
it out of the way, because it's so simple.
Just scream the answer to me.
Two vectors, u and v, are said to be orthogonal
if their dot product is equal to.
Yes.
Excellent.
What about number two?
The equality holds if and only if U and V
are.
.
Linearly independent.
And independent.
Yeah.
I don't remember the, , I would say orthogonal, but
maybe orthogonal was not in the choices I made.
Yes.
Also linearly independent would work.
, no.
Or linearly dependent.
Oh, okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Number three.
The triangle inequality.
The length of the sum of the two vector is.
Someone tells me otherwise.
I have to peak less than or equal to.
Yes.
Excellent.
Number four, the equality holds only a few.
And VR.
Yes.
That's the second part of the Cauchy-Schwarz again.
And now for number five and number six.
Let's go over them together.
, let's actually start from six just because it's easier.
, what is the maximum value of the scalar product
between , two vectors?
Well, , the best we can do is to bound
the quantity.
With the Cauchy-Schwarz.
Right, we can .
We can bounded above by the product of the length
and that that value is realised when the vectors are
collinear and oriented in the same direction.
So we can't bound them any stricter.
We can say, , less than 0.9, because we can
find two vectors for which that bound is not true,
and solution of five, which was by far the most
difficult of this of this one.
Let's have a look.
, yes, you did very well.
, this comes from the triangle inequality, and unlike the
others, this is not quite a straight, straight,
goal, but, , it's not too far off.
, we can, , .
We can use the triangle inequality, applying it to x
minus y plus y, and that it's greater than x
minus y.
Length plus y length.
And on the right hand side we get just the
length of x.
Because obviously y and minus y simplify on the left
hand side.
And then we can do the same thing with everything
reversed.
So now we have y equals y minus x plus
x.
And now note that we have that x minus y
is greater or equal than x minus y.
And it's also smaller equal than the other one.
And so we can conclude with the with the form
of of the question.
So that is a, that is , a consequence of
the triangle inequality.
It's 1:00.
So the lecture finishes here.
If you have any question, please come and see me.
Thank you very much for coming.