Right.
Okay.
, the red button has come on here.
, which means the lecture recording has started, which means
that it's the start of the class.
So, .
Yeah.
Welcome, everybody, to, , introduction to linear algebra.
, this, for many of you, will be the main,
, first semester mathematics class.
, I showed it at the beginning.
, apologise a little bit for the slightly cramped accommodation.
, because this is just a one off lecture.
, we've had lower priority in the allocation.
, the other lectures that we have are over in
the Swan Lecture Theatre, which is larger.
, so it won't feel quite as cramped.
, so without further ado, the three of us here
are the teaching team.
We are your lecturers for introduction of linear algebra.
, we each say a little bit about it when
it is our turn.
, so we've got Cordelia here.
We've got Eric here, and I am Andreas Grotto.
I will start telling you something about the general organisation
of the course, what you meant to do when, how
it's meant to work for about 20 minutes or so,
and then Cordelia and Eric will do the more exciting
thing and tell you a little bit about the sort
of mathematics you will be doing in this course.
So without further ado, this is me, Andreas.
I'm originally from Germany, although I've been Edinburgh for quite
a while.
My specialisation is applied mathematics, particular optimisation and they are
optimisation under uncertainty, but that will not very much impact
this course.
Apart from that, I see myself as a giving you
the more applied side or where this might be useful
in applied mathematics.
This semester I'm doing Ila as the only course, and
next semester I am teaching a fourth year MSC course
on optimisation.
Okay, so on the course will be we have ten
weeks of material, which is all in this textbook here,
which is free.
It is available online as PDF from the course website.
And we'll be working through some of the topics in
there.
We can't cover everything in these ten weeks.
After the ten weeks, we have one week of revision
of the material before the final assessment, which I say
is something more about these ten weeks.
I sort of organise, we organise them by topic and
every topic will roughly run Wednesday to Wednesday during the
week.
So here's a rough breakdown of what you ought to
do, or guide of what we think you ought to
do at what point.
So at the start, there's some pre-reading.
I'll tell you a little bit more about it where
we tell you what chapters of the book you should
have a look at before the lectures.
, Thursday and Fridays are the actual lectures.
These are interactive for what we call flipped classroom.
, and I will tell you a little bit of
that in the next slide.
, on the Monday after, , there is a reading
quiz.
This is online.
, there's more material for you to go through in
your own time.
About an hour's worth of material.
, there'll be more, , sort of examples or some
content that goes a little bit deeper into the topic.
, Tuesdays we have the workshops.
, we are all working together with a tutor on
problems related to that week's topic.
And then up until the Wednesday, there is an assessed
quiz on the material of the week.
, note that I say the workshops will start this
week, although we haven't actually done any material or any
pre-reading yet.
, just to get to know the whole thing.
And there's a few questions that are, , sort of
generally following on from school mathematics, you will have fun,
but workshops are starting tomorrow.
Okay.
So what is there to do?
Pre-reading.
So this flipped classroom concept that we are doing here.
, it's based on that.
We'll give you reading to do in the book before
the lectures.
So , there's a set text.
You should do that.
, this is a mandatory preparation for the lectures.
, and at the lectures, we're not going going to
go through all the material, but rather, , will be
giving you a pause for asking your questions on the
material.
, and it'll be , , give us your opinion
on that.
We'll have a statistic on how many people have answered
what.
And then discuss with your neighbour with somebody, whether you
think that what you have, what the right answer may
be, what what the answer is.
So it's very interactive and it's mandatory that you have
prepared the material before the lecture.
, all this the reading guide and all this materials
and what we call stack, , this is part and
I'm just going to show that to you.
, this is part of the course website.
, so I think this should come up.
Right.
Yeah.
On that side.
So this is roughly what you see the course website
as you see it, I see I can make it
slightly bigger.
And there's an item there that says online assessment quizzes
and lecture material.
, that is stack.
So if you go on there, , you'll have a
few more information.
Again I see whether I can get it slightly larger.
So there's the course textbook for example.
But if you scroll down you'll have the reading guide
down here for week one.
So that is what you should start to prepare to
read through mortality.
Which part of the book you should read through before
the Thursday and Friday lectures?
, okay.
, I should say, if you're doing the reading, you
should read actively, not just scan the whole thing, but
really try to understand the material as well as you
can.
That takes some time.
, and probably takes some practice to get there, but
we'll try to help you through that.
, the lectures itself are Thursday Fridays over in the
Swan Lecture Theatre.
Slightly bigger because we've got such a large class.
This is only half of the student.
, this is double taught.
So every lecture will be at 12, and we're repeating
it again at one.
, please stick to your timetable, because, you see, it
is already quite cramped.
, I did say about this flipped interactive.
I give you I give you an example of a
poll in a second, , based on the reading for
that work.
And really it is the whole idea of the whole
thing, that it is interactive, that the students are there,
that we can do sort of stuff with you.
So although everything is recorded, this is mainly done for
revision purposes.
So do come to the lectures.
Right.
Okay.
So I'll just we'll have a quick play of the
poll.
So if you try to scan the QR code, QR
code that I've got there, , and , actually I
do need to quickly just go.
Right.
Okay.
How do I do this now?
Ah, I have the QR code there at the moment
on both.
And I probably need to go on this here.
No, where am I, where am I?
Ah, sorry.
There we go.
Right.
And they should give you a poll, hopefully.
, and the questions for that poll are the following.
So have you paid?
Do you know, from what I said so far, at
which day of the week, the first lecture for Introduction
to Linear Algebra will be.
And if you do so, , you should the QR
code should write I haven't got the QR code.
I'm sorry.
There we go.
The QR code should get you to that poll.
, and I think this is open for two minutes
and I haven't got the time.
I get the moment.
The towel.
Because my coffee cup is right.
Okay, okay.
So let me just have a peek where we are.
144 people.
So anybody still trying to work out how to get
into the system?
I'll give you a few more seconds.
So during the lecture we will give you sort of
time to discuss stuff with your neighbours.
, and , depending on how complicated the question is,
you will have some time to do these polls.
That won't be quite as rushed, but.
Right.
Okay.
I think, , you see in the idea.
So if I go back here and I will display
the results.
Do we see that?
And yes, indeed, the first lecture is going to be
on Thursday.
That was option three.
So well done.
And I would now ask you to discuss with your
neighbours before telling you what the right question is.
This.
Ask you to discuss with your neighbours whether you really
got the right idea then okay, so that is the
idea.
I go back to the, , organisational part of it.
, okay.
, the next bit, I'll take a little bit, ,
through , sort of the other things that is happening.
This is a bit for reference, really.
I'm going to go relatively quickly through this part.
, so as I say, on Mondays we have a
reading quiz.
There'll be more material.
You work through that on your own time.
, has some videos on key concepts and probably examples.
, they are released early on Monday morning and you've
got time until Tuesday to work through this.
You should really work through the reading quiz because it
has additional material before the workshops on Tuesdays.
, there will be these questions.
The answers you give, there are questions in there.
There will be.
You get feedback that you will get a score that
doesn't impact your final grade.
, we then have the workshops on Tuesday.
You're all assigned to a small group, this with about
12 students together with a tutor.
And the idea is here that you're working on unseen
problems related to that week's topic, together with other people
in your group.
The tutor is there to try to help you.
, if there are any questions, , you can also,
if you have good questions for the lectures, you don't
understand something.
You want some more insight?
This would be the time to discuss it with your
tutor.
, right.
You should prepare for the workshop.
There's no questions.
The questions that you only see on the morning of
the workshop, but you should prepare for the workshop by
going through all the lecture material or the material of
that week of the topic for the week.
, right.
Assessments, , that we have that.
Yeah.
So, , there's no exam in Ila.
, but we've got three bits of assessment.
On the one hand, we've got every week at the
end of the week, there will be an online quiz
that tests how much you've understood or that you've understood
the material for that week.
, these will count 40% of the over grade.
, we then have for hand in assessments where we
ask you to write something on paper, scan it and
upload it to be marked.
They're a little bit more elaborate than the quizzes.
There'll be four of them.
They will count 30%.
And in the end we've got a synoptic assessment.
Again, this is online the quizzes.
but it will cover the whole material that we
taught over the course.
, this is the remaining 30%.
To pass the course, you will need a weighted average
of 40% over all these components.
, there's no nothing that you have to pass any
any individual component.
, if you don't do that, there is one recent
opportunity in August next year.
So the weekly assessments, , they're released every Monday at
9 a.m..
You've got time until Thursday to do them one hour
in your own time, whenever you want to do that.
Once you start them, there are two hours.
There's a two hour time limit.
Once you start at that, you have only one attempt
for these quizzes.
Now only one attempt means that you can try.
We also have a practice quiz.
, the practice quiz.
You can do as often as you , and indeed
you have to achieve at least 80% on this practice
quiz before you can do the assessed quiz.
em.
, the quizzes are that we say, , you've got
ten of them.
Only the eight best ones will count for your final
grade.
On the other hand, we don't accept because they're marked
immediately online.
We don't accept extensions for the material in the quiz.
, so you'll have to if you can't do it
for the following week, you've got the other weeks to
do them.
, the hand and assessments.
, you'll have to.
These are uploaded to the website.
We tell you more about it when they come.
The first is in week two.
, they usually cover the topics we've done immediately before
the, , the handedness due.
, there's a little bit more proof based that you
have to think it's not just a quiz.
You'll have to think a little bit.
, and you will get feedback there marked by your
tutors.
, you can discuss these at the tutors there will
be released on Thursdays, and you've got the almost the
following week until the next Wednesday to do these?
The final assessment is at the beginning of December.
It runs over a whole week.
You have two hours to do that.
You can start these two hours at any point during
the week.
They have the same format the assessed quizzes, just
that the problems are spanning the whole of all the
topics that we have in that week.
Yeah, for this one you could get extensions if you
wanted to.
, and then finally, if you're not past the course
on the first try with this assessment, there is a
risk assessment only for those that fail at the first
try.
So this is not you can't get your grade
better through this.
Only if you haven't passed the first time.
, that will then be 100% of your grade if
you pass this assessment.
That will run in August next year.
, I'll tell you more about it then.
So here is I'm not going to go into more
detail.
Here's an overview of what is going on.
On which day of the week from Wednesday to Wednesday.
Pretty much covered all of that.
I just want to make you aware that there's two
deadlines.
Oh, I should say that if you're all marking this,
the slides will all go onto the course website after
we finished with this session.
So you have them for reference material.
Right.
Okay.
, so other things, , a bit of the elephant
in the room.
, generative AI ChatGPT and so on.
To be perfectly honest, you probably all passed the cause
if you just do ChatGPT for every assignment.
Yeah.
Well, that's not the point.
Yeah.
, the point is that this really is a fundamental
cause for what you're studying later.
And the material that we're teaching you here you will
need all throughout your studies.
So if you're starting to not to just rely on
ChatGPT to do everything, you're missing out on this.
It will hurt you later.
Yeah.
So the point is, it's fundamental skills.
It's your interest to understand the material that make use
of us here to do so.
Just to summarise the rules that we're using here, you
must not use GPT for any of the assessed components
of this course.
I'm not allowed to do that.
On the other hand, you are allowed and it's actually
quite good at this to use ChatGPT or these tools
in order to help you with understanding the lecture material.
If you don't understand a certain topic, go ask GPT
whether it can help you and you can ask it
further questions.
Actually pretty good at sort of doing interactively trying to
help you.
So for that type of stuff, it is perfectly feasible
to use it, just not for anything assessed.
, right.
Okay.
So what else is there?
Support?
, I say that the main thing really is the
workshops.
So if you're struggling with something or even if you're
not struggling just it is important that you try to
discuss these problems with other students with your tutor.
Get a deeper understanding than it just get from reading
the book.
So the workshops are a one number one opportunity to
try to get help or to get a deeper understanding
of that topic that we're doing here.
We also have a drop in centre called Math Base
in Kings Buildings house.
So this is meant I'm not entirely sure of the
opening hours, but it's pretty much manageable throughout the day
on weekdays, and there's always tutors there that can help
you with any of the year one on year two
mathematics classes.
Do you use that?
They're friendly.
You can basically live in there if you want to
just work on your problems and discuss it with other
people if you want to.
, we have an online forum called Piazza, which is
linked from the website.
You can post questions there.
You can post anonymously if you to.
You can also answer each other's questions.
If a question hasn't been answered for a day or
so, then we or one of the tutors will start,
try it or will start answering the questions.
So do you make the use of that?
, this is usually quite useful.
, so again reference page.
, here's the material that you find on the learn
page.
, and on the stack part of the learn page
that I showed you earlier.
, and then my final slide is, , just this.
Don't panic.
, so there's a tendency if you come in here
that you're overwhelmed.
A lot of people will be overwhelmed.
, and you will let the tutorial find the, .
Or you find the other students who seem to know
everything, who've got an intelligent answer, intelligent questions for everything.
And you're thinking, this is not me.
Don't worry.
Everybody's in the same boat here.
Everybody feels that at the beginning.
.
Ask for help.
Yeah.
This is this is important.
And discuss it with other people.
Yeah.
, I always to say mathematics is a team
sport.
It is much easier for not trying to do it
on your own or different, different slant on.
The thing that I to say at this point
is all mathematics actually, at all levels, even for us,
looks very difficult if you first see it.
On the other hand, it all looks very easy once
you get on the other side.
And if you understood it, yeah, it is our job
here with your help, obviously, to try to get it
onto the other side.
All we need from you in that process is confidence
that you will get there and you will get there.
You are.
Just don't be overwhelmed if you're stuck at the difficult
thing at the start, and the process of getting there
is actually quite fun, I believe.
Right?
Okay, that's it for me.
, see you soon.
Indeed.
Tomorrow at the workshops.
Right.
, without further ado, I'll hand on to my colleagues,
and we should have time for questions at the end
of the session.
Yes.
Yes.
Thank you.
Skipper.
And you'll have to.
Do it with the hopes that working.
I mean, you want it off on the.
Second.
, what are you.
Planning on working out?
Because you won't be able to do that.
Okay.
So it's just.
Is it?
It's just a laptop.
It's just a the laptop here.
That is working.
There we go.
Is that working?
That does sound it's working.
Is the microphone working?
No.
Okay, that isn't just me.
It's.
It's the same that all.
Maybe it's muted.
I don't think so.
It's not muted.
No okay.
Oh well.
That's actually work.
You probably just need to start talking.
Okay.
Hello.
Hello.
Okay.
Now this one's not working, so I'm not me.
Yeah.
I tend to shout into these things so much, so
I'll shout.
Right.
Okay.
Now.
Is that working?
Okay, good.
Right.
Hello?
So we've rejigged all the text so we can start
again.
, so this is, that's that's the boring what the
course is.
So this is the less boring what the course is?
, well, actually, from a mathematical point of view.
So what is linear algebra?
, firstly, who am I?
That's a good place to start.
I am also new in Edinburgh.
I started two weeks ago so we can all get
lost on campus together.
, feel free to kind of say hi.
If you're lost, I might be able to help.
, unlike these two, I am a pure mathematician.
I come from a geometric point background.
So, , I will be bringing more of that side
of maths into it.
And you will see me again next term, where I
will be teaching you a lot of proofs and problem
solving.
So hopefully I'm not terrible.
, I also making mathematical models, so I will
come when I'm in my weeks and come and wave
weird maths models that I spend too much of my
free time making, in the hope that it might help
you understand some stuff.
, if you ever want to come play with them,
come find my office, I have loads.
, so what is linear algebra?
Briefly, the answer is vectors and matrices.
Who has seen vectors before?
Hands up.
Should hopefully be nearly all of you.
Excellent.
Keep your hand up if you have also seen matrices.
Oh, also, most of you.
That's good.
, so that is essentially what we're studying.
But let's go into a bit more detail.
, hopefully we've all seen algebra before.
You've got equations.
And , solving some equations.
, if you're linear, then that means an unknown, some
coefficient, often a coefficients a number.
In this course it will nearly always be a number.
But it could be anything.
It could be, , some other kind of coefficient, which
we'll see later.
, so it's not two coefficients times together.
It's nothing going to be x squared.
There's no x is y's.
There's no signs causes or anything that happening to
the variable.
signs causes squareds and whatnot can happen in the
coefficient but not to the variable.
Our variable is just an x sitting there by itself.
, so linear algebra is trying to solve linear equations.
Putting those two things together.
We're trying to solve equations that are linear.
That is what it is.
So for example you cannot see , there was an
example on the bottom of this board that we will.
There we go.
Some linear equations that you might have solved before.
Hopefully not those ones in things.
, but but those are some linear equations of the
type we will be solving.
So basically it's a lot school maths that you've
solved equations that.
You've probably been solving them for a good decade now.
, so we're going to keep solving those, but we're
going to make them a bit harder in two ways.
We're going to either add more coefficients, we're going to
move into higher dimensions, more abstract things, , or look
at more kind of abstract objects.
So instead of coefficients being numbers, and instead of trying
to solve for a number, we might try to solve
for another mathematical object.
, that's happening maybe a bit later.
So that's one way of viewing linear algebra.
Just essentially equations that, which hands up if you've
got an idea where to start with solving something
that.
Yeah.
So that's where we're starting, hopefully somewhere nice and safe
and kind of within most people's familiar ballpark.
, everything's linear.
, and we can write this as a matrix.
People are nodding.
People are happy.
We can write this as a matrix of coefficients, which
is kind of a similar way of writing matrix.
Putting them together.
Again, people are nodding.
, and we can find a systematic way to solve
any system of equations.
In fact, that's what we're doing in week one.
Hooray!
But that's just week one, and there's a whole nother
nine weeks.
So that is the kind of longer list of what
we are doing this term.
, presumably the words get more and more unknown the
longer you go down that list.
Yeah.
Good.
.
Don't worry, it'll be fine.
We'll go through it slowly.
So the next thing on the list is a vector
space.
, if I give you a vector three minus five
two, that could be many things.
So it could be a point in three dimensional space.
Three in the x direction, minus five in the y
two in the z.
That's probably what most people are familiar with.
But it could be other things.
It could be a bit of statistical data or the
properties of an object, maybe its colour, for example.
Or it could be something even more abstract.
It could be a polynomial.
I could say, well, in relation instead of x, y
and z, I could say one x and x squared,
or I could go even more abstract.
And instead of x, y z I could have sine
x, sine two x and sine three x.
I said there was no not going to be any
functions with variables, but there they are.
We're not solving for them though.
So all of this depends if I give some if
some mathematician anywhere in the department come up to you
and gives you a vector, they might not just be
talking about a vector in three dimensional, you're talking about
something much more general, depending on their context, the conventions
they have, or to use the kind of proper maths
lingo, their vector space and the particular basis they're using.
So we'll look into that.
, but we won't jump into that more abstract side.
To begin with, we'll start with nice, familiar 2D and
3D space that you've been doing for years and years.
Hopefully we all have a basic grasp of two dimensional
geometry.
, you can draw it on a sheet of paper.
, you're probably got some familiarity with three dimensional stuff.
We're going to do a lot more of it.
, we will have demonstrations and I will show you
things.
We will all show you things.
And I might occasionally come and wave some things in
front of you.
, and we will get much better at visualising kind
of abstract, three dimensional space.
We can't do four dimensional space.
Our brains aren't wired for it, so we can't really
visualise anything after that.
So that's that.
, but what we will do is develop these methods
for two and three dimensional space that can then be
extended to four, five, six, seven, 2,000,000,000,004.
, if you really wanted to solve some 2,000,000,000,004 dimensional
problem, I wouldn't recommend it without a computer.
, but this is the importance of proof that we
can take a kind of concept we have developed in
two and three dimensions, and generalise it up to something
that allows us to solve something ridiculous.
, so that's kind of the other side of linear
algebra.
We can solve mechanisms of vectors and matrices problems.
We can solve these linear equations.
We can develop the theory behind it.
And that allows us to completely understand linear equations.
This is one bit of maths where we kind of
more or less understand it, which is great and wonderful.
, and it allows us to do two things.
It allows us to take big, complicated things that exist
in weird and wonderful abstract, applied and weird places.
Often you can simplify down to a linear problem and
we can solve linear problems.
So that's nice.
So that's one reason linear algebra is really important, because
all these bits of maths you're going to learn in
your second, third, fourth, however many years afterwards.
Often if you can make it less complicated by making
it linear.
But we can also do the opposite if we understand
what's happening in two and three dimensions, and we generalise
it to 456 405, we can also generalise it out
of matrices and vectors, the kind of ideas we develop
here.
Build your mathematical brains and build the idea of how
to do proof, and even how to solve these equations,
so we can solve far more complicated equations later on.
So on that note.
Here's Erik.
Hello.
Hello.
, welcome.
My name is Eric Eric Horman.
I will be this.
This microphone is not.
I will be the third lecturer on this course.
Despite my German sounding name, I'm actually Italian.
I studied in Italy until coming here to do my
PhD, and I joined Edinburgh last Thursday.
So in a game of who joined last, I probably
win, , hands down.
So yeah, I'm teaching Introduction to Linear Algebra and a
bunch of other courses.
The department really likes to call them by their initials,
and it's just my exercise to learn all of them
before the first lecture of each.
And, , of course, Andreas already gave you all the
information about the course.
So what we'll be talking about is, , today is
what linear algebra can leads you to Because, as you
mentioned, linear algebra is a fundamental part of your mathematical
toolkit.
And so I will give you a few examples of
where linear algebra is used.
Just a few.
Otherwise we could have an entire semester course just about
that.
And I want to do that by going through my
experience of linear algebra.
Linear algebra is the first course in mathematics and physics
because I did physics in my undergrad, even in Italy.
And the two biggest problem that I found when I
did linear algebra for the first time is that it
was a new way of doing math, as Cordelia was
explaining so well a moment ago, and also that it's
abstract and for the new way of doing maths, don't
worry, you will get used to follow all of the
advice that Andrés gave you.
Seek out for help.
We're here right on Piazza.
We're just an email away if you need us.
And the second one.
Well, let's see that.
That will be my talk.
And the obvious reason.
Sorry, the obvious way of, , , going past the
problem that linear algebra is very abstract is to try
and visualise it.
And the standard way is what Cordelia talked about transformation
in space, either on the plane or in 3D space.
, that might work for you, but it might not
work for everyone.
And it's also very limiting in what linear algebra can
do.
So if you need, , to think about a few
more ways, , where what you're studying and perhaps getting
a little bit stuck on it might be useful.
Here are some few interesting examples to keep you motivated
throughout these coming ten weeks.
And I'll start by saying that linear algebra truly is
the language of applied mathematics.
The applications are endless and these are brought to you
in no particular order except the bias of what I
the most.
Video games.
If you've played any major video games in the last
few years, you probably have heard of ray tracing.
And ray tracing is the science of generating a virtual
image by following light rays bouncing off.
And obviously that is a transformation in R3, the three
dimensional space.
And this is why graphics engines are built on linear
algebra.
And, , this is why GPUs are really good with
linear algebra, because creating a scene on the computer is
nothing else but solving a lot of linear algebra problems
very quickly.
And this is inherently is also why GPUs are very
good at machine learning, because the same mathematics that goes
behind that also goes behind training AI models.
And I highlighted these two methods of machine learning, principal
component analysis and singular value decomposition.
Because these two methods that are widely used in a
lot of machine learning tasks are lifted straight from the
course, they're basically a elaboration of what we would call
eigenvalues and eigenvectors decomposition.
So by the end of this course, you should be
able to have a look at those methods and at
least have a basic understanding of what is going on.
There are some differences do not apply to square matrices.
But we will see that, , we will see that,
, later on this semester.
, the next one is network analysis, which , is
the topic of my PhD.
So you will forgive me if I set it aside
for a moment and then come back and talk about
it a little bit more extensively in a minute.
There's a lot of, , , applications in physics, for
example, fluid dynamics.
They go under the name of finite difference methods for
differential equations, for example.
So if you're interested in that side of computational physics,
this is also the course for you.
And as I mentioned, I could go on for hours
at a time.
, but instead let's just go back to a network.
A network is a mathematical object model that.
It's a bunch of elements connecting and interacting pairwise.
It could be people connected.
If they're friends together, they could be web pages, if
they're connected, if and only if there's a hyperlink from
one to the other.
There's blue words that you click and bring you somewhere
else in the World Wide Web.
It could be airports connected if and only if there's
a direct flight flying from one to the other.
And the trick is that this graph is really just
a matrix that Cordelia was describing, where the matrix is
built so that there's a zero between the nodes that
don't have an edge, and the one between the nodes
that do have an edge.
, and because of that, linear algebra automatically gives a
lot of results into a lot of different applications, just
by the fact that so many things, including graphs, can
be modelled by matrices and vectors.
So one thing that the that we're able to do
is to find communities, group of friends, for example, on
the, on the Facebook friendship networks, probably, , all the
people that who have gone to school with will have
a lots of friendship in common, and so we'll be
coloured on the same, , will be coloured the same
colour on this, on this friendship network.
And I really want to stress this comes directly from
analysing that matrix.
There is no, , specific task performed on the graph
here.
Just by looking at the matrix, we can recreate that
partition into communities.
Another important one, and one that I think is really
cool, is to find the most important nodes in the
in the network, or the most important airports, or the
most important web pages on the internet.
And here is the same graph just plotted with the
most important nodes plotted bigger.
And again, and this result here comes straight from the
application of the eigenvalue decomposition of that matrix representing the
graph.
So this is just purely applied linear algebra.
It's just the meaning that we're giving to those elements.
Just just so happened to be the World Wide Web
just so happens to be a graph.
And the reason why I think this is so cool
is because this is how Google was started.
, this is the paper that started Google.
It literally starts in this paper.
We present Google, and it was a linear algebra idea
that Larry Page and Sergey Brin, , published in 1998,
and gave rise to the algorithm that sorts the web
pages for you.
When you insert a query into the Google ask box
if you want.
So whenever you use Google, you're really just asking them
to solve a linear algebra problem for you.
, and again I want to stress that that problem
will be covered in this course.
It's basically an eigenvalue decomposition.
So we'll be in week seven I think or something
that.
And yeah it's a big step.
, there's a lot of material to cover.
, but you will see it will all ties in,
it will all train together with each other.
So as soon as the machinery of the course gets
going, you will become familiar.
, very quickly I renew the invite, not to panic
of Andreas.
And you'll be fine.
, just remember that whenever we see something new, try
to build on whatever you have seen before, because finding
relationship is really the whole point of mathematics and science
in general.
And so enjoy the ride.
Thank you.
Yeah.
So we just.
We could actually write okay, let's see what we're doing.
Right.
Okay.
So we think half time for probably ten minutes or
so for questions.
, in case there are any that you have to
the organisational part or to the mathematical part, anybody.
right now you can go for the throw or
you can pass it up, I don't know, try it,
try it.
Let's see how it works.
So we're doing.
This.
, how are we going to be split into tutor
groups?
So you should have, , been notified.
I think on your timetable, it tells you a time
and some of the slash.
I think it tells you a group number between 1
and 60 after the slash.
, that will be the tutorial group.
, and we're all in the same room over in
the nucleus building.
, if you arrive there, , we will then tell
you how to work out from your tutorial group.
Which table you're on is a simple linear algebra problem
to solve, but you will manage to do that.
Okay.
Yeah.
Good.
Any other questions?
If you throw the if you throw the dice back
to us.
To you.
You can do it without the catching, if you prefer.
Right.
Okay.
Over there.
I think I.
Didn't understand, otherwise I would have.
I would have repeated it.
But, .
You need to talk into the black line.
Oh.
Oh.
Oh, wow.
Okay.
, so what would you do if you still haven't
been employed?
, I saw in your optional modules.
If you if you haven't been what I.
Saw in your optional modules.
, so this would be something your, , cohort lead
or student support, are you.
Which which school are you in?
A school of informatics.
I don't know how informatics organised, but it'll be on
your side.
Your cohort lead or or student support people.
, they should look after how to register to option
models.
I'm to some extent I know how this course work,
and I'm hoping everything does, but there's a lot of
stuff going on behind the scenes.
All right.
Any other questions?
I just want to pass it on.
, so if there is a clash with the lectures
and it's unavoidable, would I be recommended to attend this
lecture?
Well, I mean, yes, obviously.
Yes.
It depends.
I don't know what the other lecture is, how they're
doing it.
Some lectures are easier to just catch up online, or
the lectures are more that you want to be there
in person.
We do have two separate times.
We're trying to exercise pretty easy, fit it evenly.
It won't be quite as crammed as this here, usually
because we have a bigger room.
But obviously if everybody's coming at 12:00, we've got a
problem.
So that sorts the problem.
That's okay.
You can you can request the change of lecture time.
You can request the change of tutorial time.
There may be slightly slow doing the request.
Talk to me, email me or so if there's a
problem with that.
yeah.
But because of the interactive nature of the thing, I
would really encourage you to attend the lectures if you
want or if you can.
Okay.
Thank you.
Right.
Okay.
.
I think I'm reasonably told.
Not that all.
, how many hours we expected to work on this
course per week?
I think the general guideline throughout the university is that
you should have a 40 hour week.
, and that is roughly split by the number of
credits you have for this course.
I think this is a 20 credit course, so it
will be a third of your of the 40 hours
in total.
And then together with the other courses.
That might of course change.
Sometimes you'll have essays.
You have something to do.
But yeah, try to try to understand the material I
think most of all.
Okay.
Thank you.
All right.
Maybe 1 or 2 more questions.
The thing I've seen you up before.
This is just a quick question about the quizzes.
Are they , should we do them in exam conditions
or are we free to use , material during.
, so the quizzes.
No, they're not tracked.
You can do them at home.
, just the only thing is there's a time limit
Once you start the quizzes, but otherwise, no, they're not
on the exam condition or checked in any way.
You can start them at home whenever you want to,
or anywhere with an internet connection, right?
I think I had one.
So I'm not sure of the order.
I did see you here first, I think.
Thanks.
, I've submitted a group change request form for one
of the lecturers because of clash.
, until that gets actioned, am I okay to just
show up for the other one?
I think you just have to show up whenever suits.
I know that the last slot, which is probably not
the one that you want, but the 430 slot is
not fully booked.
We do have space there.
, but otherwise.
Yeah.
Just try.
And if we haven't got space, we'll just have to
bump you off.
Okay.
Right.
, okay, I think I need to stop it at
this point.
We've got somebody from the AI society who wants to
say a few words.
, the three of us are going to disappear because
we need to do another the lecture again in a
different part of the campus.
If there are any more questions at the tutorials of
the workshops tomorrow, one of us three will be there
at every single session, and you can ask us questions
about the course then.
You want to wait, wait, wait, wait before you all
rush off, we have you from the AI society wants
to just say a few words, so please don't just
run away.
Sorry, it's just going to take, , two minutes.
, hi, I'm Valentine, I'm from the Edinburgh AI society.
I'm a master's student in cognitive science, and this year
we're doing a bunch of really amazing stuff.
I'll start off with the most important one.
You can win £1,000 if you build the best project
at our AI I xpo.
This is specifically designed in a way that you don't
need any experience.
, creativity is judged very highly, so any of you,
even with little coding experience, could actually win this.
, it's going to be on the November the 16th.
And, , if you want to get a bit more
experience, , in coding and working with AI, we do
host workshops every second week starting next week, actually.
, so if you want to get some hands on
experience before that, just join us.
, there's all the information on our website, and we're
also looking for some people to help out in the
community.
So if you have some experience in graphic design, if
you're a photographer, or if you're just generally interested in
helping us out, , just shoot us a message on
Instagram.
, that's it.
Thank you very much.