Okay.
Welcome to week four of Introduction to Linear Algebra.
, I'll leave the QR code for attendance.
Just a few more seconds.
If anyone hasn't managed to scan it already.
But as we will see, week four is a very
packed week and a very important one because we start
talking about determinants and invertibility and which are all things,
all topics that essentially will serve as the basis for
the big thing that's coming up, which is matrix diagonalization,
eigenvalues, eigenvector and everything else.
Okay.
So I hope everyone has managed to take the attendance
And let's start with a quick overview of what we
are discussing this this week together.
So as you as you are familiar with now, the
week is divided in sort of two parts.
You have two readings and two lectures.
And so today we will look at the definition of
determinants.
And we will look at cofactor expansion.
We will look at some basic property of determinants and
determinants of spatial matrices.
On the other hand is something wrong.
No.
Okay.
Thank you.
Okay.
Whereas tomorrow we will focus more on some other
things, which is how to use determinants to check whether
or not a matrix is invertible and how to calculate
explicitly the inverse using the aggregate matrix.
There's plenty of material about this, but in the reading,
and I also created a few videos that sort of
summarise all of these topics.
Yes, I see hands.
There's no question.
There's no question.
.
That's okay.
I'm not the manager of that.
The core secretary is.
So we will try again at the end of the
lecture.
But now I need to go to go on.
.
Anything else?
Nope.
Okay.
, okay.
So let's start straight with hopefully this book club would
will work.
, so just make sure you sign in for, ,
for the time being.
, this should be the same code, by the way.
It's just one is embedded in the in the slide,
and the other one isn't.
, and we will start with some sort of, ,
very simple getting to know the tool a little bit.
, question.
You should be seeing question one already, which should be,
, filling the gap question.
, so I'm going to give you a minute or
two to make club work and to, .
Start thinking about what you're reading and submit the answers.
If anyone has any problem with this book club, please
tell me sooner rather than later because otherwise this one
not working would be a problem.
Okay.
I do not have a timer for the bookclub question,
but I will wrap them up myself.
Okay, so a lot of questions are in.
And, , okay, let's go over them together.
The question asks is the definition of the cofactor cij.
I represents the row or column while j represents.
Well, it's going to be the other one obviously.
And really we could, we could choose, , whatever.
We to answer this question, but we need to
stay consistent throughout the course.
We can decide to have rows first and column seconds
or column first row seconds, that's fine.
But because the entire mathematical community has sort of agreed
that the first number refers to the row and the
second number refers to the column, then it's just a
useful to go with that, because then everything we read
of the of the of the book, everything that we
lecture prepare in the lecture notes, we'll use that convention.
So in a matrix, in a matrix A and I
represent the row that we're looking at.
And J represents the column.
And that was the easy part.
The more difficult bit was the second one which
ask what are the dimension of the cofactor?
And , I see that I have a great number
of answers.
I have n and minus one.
I am J all over the place.
What is the cofactor?
How is the cofactor defined?
The cofactor is something, but the crucial thing is the
part that the cofactor is a determinant.
It's the determinant of the a j a ij
matrix, which is the one that is stripped of the
ith column and the jth and the jth row.
So the cofactor is a scalar number.
It has dimension one times one okay.
The reduced matrix will have dimensions m minus one and
minus one.
That is correct.
But the cofactor is defined as its determinant.
And so for that reason C I j of
a will be.
In.
Have you seen this notation here before?
R to the power of one times one.
It's essentially means that it's a it's a single number.
Okay.
Doesn't have any columns.
Doesn't have any row.
It's a scalar.
Okay.
Hopefully that clarifies things a little bit.
, because we're going to use that in the, in
the rest of the lecture quite extensively.
Okay.
Please don't log out of book club in this lecture
because I haven't copied the QR all the time.
So while we while we are still at the beginning,
I'm happy to go back and show you the QR
to log in again.
But as we go further down, , it would take
me quite a long time.
Okay.
.
Second question.
True or false?
Let's keep investigating.
, the cofactor and how the cofactor is related to
the determinant.
We've seen that the the determinant of the matrix and
the cofactors are, , are strictly related.
We've seen an important theorem which states that we can
take the cofactor expansion over all rows and all columns,
and we get the determinant.
And so I'm going to update the question on bookclub.
Hopefully that should update it for you as well.
just going to show you the the QR once
more.
If you are having trouble perhaps you've been locked out.
And in the meantime I'll give you some time to
think.
But what I'm saying is the determinant.
We can write as the sum over.
For example, am I taking the sum of our column
or a row there?
Raise your hand if you think I'm taking the expansion
over a row.
Okay.
Raise your hand if you think I'm taking it over
the column.
Okay.
Those are still too few hands, so let's think again
and we will vote again in 30s.
Anyone who thinks I'm taking the the expansion of a
row now.
Okay.
Anyone who thinks I'm taking it over a column.
Okay, so the key, the key thing to see here
is how does that some behaves that some changes.
The second element of the indices of the of the
matrix.
So it changes the j.
And I'm and I'm expanding over the element I, j
and j refers to the column as we've just seen
in question one.
And so that may be a little bit confusing.
But if you think about that, the column is changing
all the time.
And the row which is expressed by IE stays constant
instead.
So that is a deceptive.
It's a correct but a little bit deceptive.
You have to think about it a little bit.
, because the column is changing, I am actually expanding
over the ith row because if you think about what
that would, that expression really is, is something as a
, I one times the determinant of a i1 plus
a I2 plus a i3, and so on and so
forth.
And so as you can see, these is just the
ith row of the matrix.
Okay.
Cool.
Back to the main question now is that the right
, the right formula for the cofactor expansion.
Let me see.
How's it going?
Oh, split down in the middle.
Excellent.
, okay.
Since we are so split, I would to to
take a minute and discuss with your neighbours Why do
you think your opinion is the correct one?
All right.
I'm going to mute myself for a minute and hopefully.
Okay, let's see how we are doing now via a
raise of hands once again.
If you think that is the correct excuse me.
If you think that that is the correct expansion expansion
for the determinant.
Now raise your hands.
Okay.
Down.
If you think it's not, raise your hands.
It is not.
That is correct.
And again these expressions are tricky right.
They're they're they're deceptive.
If they're I would have put if I put their
I j psi of a then that would have been
the right the right expansion.
But here I just put the determinant of the minor
matrix.
And so what am I missing.
Anyone?
The sign.
The sign of the cofactor I forgot to put in
here.
And that's.
Right.
The cofactor expansion down.
And as you can see, it looks much the same.
But when we really go to the to the origin
of how we expand the determinants, we have three terms.
And then what we do is we collect the first
and the third one and we call it the the
cofactor.
Right.
So in there I've always I've also put the definition
of the cofactor implicitly if you want whatever multiplies I
j to get the determinant into that sum that will
be the cofactor.
Okay.
So these exercises are quite.
Quite tricky.
, because matrices are trickier than numbers, right?
There's much more structure about matrices.
There's much more results that that we're going to see
in this course than on numbers alone.
So we need to tread carefully when we engage with
matrices.
It's very important to make sure that you're following the
results, , quite closely because even something that may look
it's correct, the expression above, which is
very similar to the correct one, but it's slightly off.
, it may not work.
Okay.
Any questions so far?
Right.
Okay.
The next exercise is a little bit, , more structured
in the sense that, , I don't know if you've
done this during the reading, but one of the suggestions
that I really have for anyone approaching determinants and cofactor
expansion for the for the first time is trying to
get used to them as much as possible.
And so I've set aside four minutes, five minutes in
this lecture for you to practice on a three by
three matrix.
So what I would you to do is to
write down the cofactor, the determinant cofactor expansion for that
matrix and choosing two different rows, and then show that
you get the same result.
As a spoiler alert.
I'll be doing that for the first and second rows.
So if you do that then you can check against
my work.
If you do something else and you still find that
they're the same.
That's still a pretty solid suggestion that you're that you
have done things correctly as an extra if you finish
early, , or maybe at home, because calculating three in
a row gets pretty boring.
You can try and prove that also along the column
and everything works okay.
That is the big result of the reading for this,
for this, for this lecture that we are not able
to prove yet.
If you notice in the in the in the book,
there's a note that, well that says something we
we were going to prove this result in section 3.6
I think, which is in a few weeks.
Okay.
So we have to take it for granted for now,
but we can check on some special cases.
I don't know what's happening with the connection to my
tablet, but I can plug it in again and see
how it goes.
Okay, I'm going to start my solution to this.
If you haven't finished, that's fine.
You can catch up as we go.
, okay, so this is the first, , cofactor expansion
along the first row.
What I've done is exactly applying the first formula where
I was equal to one.
I controls the row.
And as you can see in the first sum, the
second index of the of the elements that multiply the
determinant changes, and so the row is going through the
three rows of the matrix.
And then I expand the smaller determinants which for a
two by two matrix we know we can write out
explicitly.
And then I expand everything okay.
So that is the correct hopefully expression of the determinant
of A.
And the result that we have seen was that if
I do it along another row then everything works out.
And if you do it for another row, , you
get that expression there.
And how do we check that they are the same?
Well, we need to check that they contain the same,
, the same, , triple products.
And I'm just going to highlight a few and then
I'll let you finish this, For example, the triple product
of the three diagonal members are here and here.
This triple product here, which contains minus A1 one, also
appears here.
I think that's the same.
Yes.
, the third one here contains minus A1221, three three.
That's this one here.
Oh, you know what?
Let's just do them all.
It's not that long.
122331 is here.
One, three with plus must be this one because the
other one has minus.
And in fact, it's the same.
And then the last one is here okay.
So the theorem in this particular case is working if
we expand over different rows , then everything, , everything,
, provides us with the with the same correct result.
So in the summary that I was presenting to you
earlier about the cofactor expansion and the determined.
Sorry, that is shaking.
I don't know what was happening.
, which was this one?
I need to add a little remark here that also
says we can actually do it however we .
Okay.
Why is this important?
It's important because if you have a row that is
mostly zeros or mostly ones, but zeros are better.
If we choose that row or column, then our expansion
is greatly, greatly simplified because whenever an element is zero,
the whole term, including the determinant of the matrix multiplies.
It goes away.
Right?
, so it's it's a practically important result.
In that sense, it helps us calculate determinants a little
bit easier.
Okay.
Any questions about this?
Right.
Note that this is not a proof.
We've proven it for two rows in a three by
three matrix.
If I were to ask you to prove it for
a five by five matrix, then we'd be spending the
whole hour just doing my nodes, minor determinants and then
calculating everything.
Okay.
So okay.
Question five.
, now the question starts to become, in my opinion,
at least a little bit more interesting.
, we're sort of approaching assessment territory here, you know,
so far was just some definitions here.
We need to think about it.
Okay.
So we have that matrix M which has that structure
there.
We have some numbers that I haven't specified but I
want those numbers to be non zeros.
So d1 d2 and d3 are non zeros.
And then we have zeros below them and above them.
we can choose.
We have if we choose them positive numbers we
get matrix A some some positive numbers.
If we choose them equal to zero we get matrix
B, and if we choose them negative we get matrix
C.
And my question to you again refer to the book
club is I'm not am I showing it.
Yes.
, what is the relation between the determinants of the
three matrices.
You will have a few options to choose from.
Is there anything we can say?
Do we have enough information to make an informed decision
about how the three determinants sort of work and or
compare against each other, or we don't have enough information?
I'll give you a minute to discuss and come up
with your with your solution to this.
Okay, let's see how the first answers are coming in.
Yep.
, there's a pretty clear majority that thinks that the
three.
Oh, I forgot the last determinant there.
That should be determinant of C, obviously.
Sorry about that.
But you correctly guess the answer despite my error.
Well what is going on here.
Can anyone summarise in a few words what's happening here?
Yeah, just just go for it.
Yeah.
The determinant is the product of the entry.
Yeah.
It doesn't matter what the start values are.
Yeah.
Absolutely correct.
Yes.
Thank you.
The key observation here is that if we take those
values to be zero, we get a diagonal matrix.
If we take them to be anything else, we get
an upper triangular matrix.
But the second key observation is that for both the
formula to calculate the determinant, the simplified version of the
determinant is the same.
It's just the product of the three diagonal well, the
n diagonal terms in general, in this case three.
So you have correctly identified that, , that is indeed,
, that it's it's indeed irrelevant whether we assign zero
or non-zero values to the stars up there.
And so these are the two propositions that were in
one of the videos, , literally taken from the same
deck of slides.
, and that works.
Even if we had put the stars on the lower
triangle, because for both upper and lower triangular matrices, ,
the formula still holds.
Okay.
Right.
And if you have seen the video, I make a
comment.
I say because of this, diagonal matrices are nice.
And actually triangular matrices are just as nice as, ,
diagonal matrices if we have one of them calculating the
determinant.
I'm so sorry.
, calculating the determinant.
The determinant is not about taking a minor determinant and
combining them and expanding.
We just do a multiplication of a few numbers and
we're done.
So 1st May think, well, we have seen how to
reduce a matrix to an upper triangular matrix.
Right.
What's the keyword for doing that.
How how did we call the result of that of
that operation.
Yeah.
Just scream it if you have it.
Yeah.
The row operation that puts it in row echelon form.
That is an upper an upper triangular matrix.
So one might think, well, if I don't know how
to calculate the determinant, but I know how to put
it in row echelon form.
Could I do a row echelon form and then just
multiply the diagonal and find the determinant.
The answer is yes.
And that is the next exercise that I invite you
to do.
This is not this is a matrix that already starts
to be a little bit in row echelon form.
So you can see I put some zeros and some
easy numbers in the lower part.
, and I would you to try to put
in row echelon form for the sake of time.
I know that you're very familiar with that, but I'm
going to give you the row operation so we don't
waste time with that.
And I want you to calculate the determinant by using
the row echelon form okay.
So again it's not a massive amount of computation but
it is some computations.
So I'm going to give you two more minutes.
I'll come around and then we will wrap up this
question together.
Any questions.
Okay.
So.
I had muted myself now.
Okay, so as usual, lectures are very short.
I'm sorry but I need to move on if we
have done.
Oh okay.
Right.
I put it in the other order okay.
And we know that these type of , of operations
are allowed because they don't change the solutions of the
system, right?
That's week one, Ila.
Do they change the determinant?
Raise your hand if yes.
Raise your hand if no.
Right.
They do, but they do it in a predictable way.
So we can account for the change that we introduced
by doing that and then go back and correct for
that.
And what I mean is this.
And when we do so it's a valid method to
calculate the determinant by putting everything in row echelon form.
But we need to be careful about how we're changing
the determinant.
So this these are the three rules.
As we've seen in one of the videos.
If you swap two columns or two rows the determinant
changes sign.
So whenever we swap columns or rows we need to
remember that we are introducing a times minus one into
the determinant.
If we're multiplying a row again, that was one of
the basic results of the determinant one of the basic
properties.
Then if we multiply a row or a column, we
multiply the determinant by the same factor.
Same needs to be different than zero here.
I cannot multiply.
I mean I can multiply something by zero.
But then I get the determinant equal to zero and
I never recover.
So it's not a smart move.
And instead if I combine two or more rows then
it doesn't matter.
Linear combinations of rows or columns do not change the
determinant.
Okay, with that in mind.
Hopefully I have done the calculations through variational form correctly.
We should check with one of you probably, but let's
assume that this is what we get.
.
The determinant of this matrix is just minus four, because
it's just the product of the elements on the diagonal.
And if you remember which operations we've done, which were
these ones.
, the first three are linear combination.
So we don't change the determinant at all.
But the last one we have to swap the last
and the second to last row, because otherwise the minus
two two would spoil the lower triangular property of the
matrix.
And so if this matrix that the reduced row echelon
form of the first one has determined and minus four,
then the original determinant.
How to be four okay, because we changed its sign
when we swapped the rows at the last step okay.
So this is another option for calculating determinants a little
bit more effectively and more and with less probability of
making an algebra mistake, probably then just going through the
whole expansion for big matrices.
Note that this one was a 4x4, and so in
principle, a 4x4 is very hard to do.
, to do directly.
Well, it's not hard, it's just long.
And the chances of making mistakes are plentiful.
And with that in mind, the next exercise.
Can we do a five by five?
Okay.
There's no way we can fit the calculation of general
determinants five by five by the end of the lecture.
that's just something that we cannot do.
So we need to do something a little bit smarter
and use one of the properties that that we've seen
in the, in the reading and in the videos.
Okay.
And .
can you see how to do that?
Now, again, only for the interest of time.
, I'm going to give you one minute to think
about it, and then I'm going to spoil the result
for you.
But give it a think.
Look at the structure of the matrix.
Maybe you can manipulate a little bit and obtain something
that's a little bit more reasonable than doing a five
by five or in one go.
Remember, whenever you do a five by five, at every
step of the expansion, you get a determinant 4x4, which
you need to expand again.
And then so you get five determinants 4x4 each expanded
four times.
That's 20.
And those are determinants three by three.
So you get 60 terms to compute.
If you were doing that directly you can cut it
down by expanding along the first column for example which
has two zeros.
But it's it's still going to leave you with a
lot of algebra to do.
So.
What do you see in the structure of that matrix?
Anyone?
Yeah.
The third and fourth columns we get a block of
zeros.
Yeah.
So it's not quite in block format, but almost if
we swap the the third and the fourth column, we
get a upper triangular block matrix, a matrix which has
it's divided in blocks.
And the lower block and the lower block on the
left hand side is all made of zeros.
And as we've seen, this is what we get.
And as we've seen in the, in the, in the
reading, , this is much easier to calculate because for
an upper or lower triangular block matrix.
The determinant is just the product of the determinant of
the blocks and the diagonal.
Okay, we started with 60 terms a little bit less
because there were zeros in the original matrix.
Here we do just for the three expansion for the
three by three and the two by two block at
the bottom right hand side.
Okay.
, so this is just, , , an exercise to
really point out that looking at possible structural properties of
the matrix, if you can identify patterns in how the
matrix is constructed, you can really count down your computations
with respect to a normal, , sort of direct approach.
Yeah.
Well, swapping the columns.
Yes, you have you have to keep in mind that
when you swap the column, you change that.
And I think I kept track of that.
Yeah.
Here.
Don't forget the minus sign.
It's all good.
But we need.
And in fact, if you see there it's minus the
determinant times the determinant.
Yeah.
That is always a good point.
Whenever you touch the matrix to manipulate it, you have
to keep track of the three rules that that we've
seen above.
Okay.
And then if you want to do the calculations, but
there's really not anything particularly interesting in that you should
get assuming I've done the calculations correct myself.
-1014 okay.
Right.
So we've seen a 4x4, five by five.
Let's do a six by six.
No no no no no no I'm joking I'm joking.
There's no six by six today.
, let's instead do this one here.
Let's go back to a three by three with an
Within with a single element that it's not it's not
known.
, so before essentially we had a matrix which had
a lot of unknowns, but it was either diagonal or
upper triangular, and we could say something about the determinant.
Now I'm sort of swapping the the premise here instead
of giving you a matrix with structure, I'm giving you
a matrix that you know much better, but it has
just one element which we don't know.
And the question is, can we say anything about the
sign of the determinant of that matrix?
And do I have a question for this?
Yes.
If you go in the book club there's a question
about this itself.
Okay.
Right.
Think about how the expression of the determinant is constructed.
Or you can try substituting in some values and see
what you get.
But essentially I'm asking if you don't know X.
Can you tell me anything about the determinant of being
positive negative or zero?
Okay.
Okay.
let's have a look at what the answers are coming
in.
I'll give you a few more seconds to vote.
Just because I see that only 50 have voted.
Try to make up your mind and send me a
yes or no.
But it's not a yes or no.
It's a multiple choice.
But I mean.
Okay, I'm going to uncover the answers now.
All right.
So the majority of you, almost two thirds think that
there's no enough there's not enough information.
And, , that would be the correct answer.
But why?
Well, this matrix has no structure, right?
There's no result.
Theorem, proposition.
Corollary.
We can hope.
can in our help.
So the best approach to do this is to just
calculate the determinant in the boring way of expanding along
row of or a column.
Now, because we want to isolate X, because we want
to study what what the dependence on X is would
be smart to choose either the third column or the
second row, because then x is not in another determinant.
It just appears as one coefficient multiplying another determinant, which
is just a number.
And what I mean by that is is this if
we do, , let's expand it along the third column,
we get that and X is still our unknown.
Right.
Just for reference, let's have a look at the matrix
back.
So I'm going to multiply one then x.
Then three x has the minus because of the rules
of the signs.
And the rest are the determinants of the two by
two remaining.
And this does this help you?
No.
I see head shaking.
It doesn't help you.
But what if I tell you that those determinants are
just numbers.
You can just calculate those determinants.
Right.
The first one is ten minus two eight.
The second one is ten minus three seven.
And the third one is eight -12 minus four.
Right.
Sorry four -12 minus eight.
let's try and do that.
And we get the determinant.
And x are, are related by essentially what is
a line.
It's minus seven x minus six okay.
So obviously if we write the determinant as y and
we plot it in the plane, and then we study
the sign of our determinant for some values of x,
the determinant will be, , negative for some values will
be zero and for some values will be positive.
Right.
And in particular for minus six seventh that matrix reduces
to a matrix with zero determinant.
You can go back and check why that is.
It will make it so you can express the third
row as combination of the first two.
Okay.
I invite you to go back and check that for
minus six seven, always assuming that my calculations are right.
Okay, finally we have just shy of five minutes to
go.
, the last question, , which is, , sum up
of everything we've seen today.
I'm telling you, I'm giving you some properties.
Some may be real, some may be made up by
me this morning.
And I'm asking you which ones are actually true.
And you have a few options on this.
Some of them.
All of them.
None of them.
Only a combinations of them.
Take.
Take your time to discuss.
I'll give you two minutes, because this one I can
prove to you in, in just a couple of minutes
at the end.
Just just something.
Note that some of them say a i.j.
The second and the fourth one are I.
So I'm just talking about the diagonal.
Just something to be aware of because sometimes it's easy
to, , misinterpret a J with a with I.
All right, let's see the results.
Okay.
There's a good mixture of two.
Seems to be the preferred ones, but there's also a
fair amount of people that they think that I just
wake up this morning and decided to make up for
properties out of nowhere.
And the funny thing is, they're right.
I just that's how I spend my mornings anyway.
So yes, they're all made up.
I just made up.
And this is this plugs into the main in the
into the main message that I would you to
take home today, which is at least for determinants, the
structure of the matrix is much more important than the
actual values that it's that it contains.
And if you go back and see the other exercises
that we've done, they all sort of hint towards that.
If you have some structure, it's easy to tell something
about the determinant of the matrix, even with incomplete information.
If you know everything about the values but you are
having complete information about the structure, then it's very hard
to do anything.
And how very quickly.
We still have a minute.
Sorry.
Very quickly.
Can we give some can we give some counterexamples to
show that they they are wrong, and I'm just going
to write them down so you can check at home
because the lecture is almost done.
And the counterexample for one, you can look at the
matrix one to.
Two, one for number two you can look at 0110.
For number three you can look at minus two, minus
two, minus one, minus one.
And for the last one possibly the easiest one you
could look at just the the the matrix that has
all ones.
And all of that will , will show you that
while the premise, the hypothesis is satisfied, the determinant
does not, , does not satisfy the property that I
just invented this morning.
All right.
Thank you for coming.
I'll see you tomorrow.
Same time, same place.