My goodness.
You're not sure?
Let me know.
I will, I will.
I don't know.
I'm sorry.
I will be back next week.
After that.
I was in Germany.
Almost every day seems to be talking about this.
I just want to ask you.
Yes or no?
At any point in your life.
Have you served.
Onions on a sesame seed bun.
McDonald's.
Yes or no?
That's it, I have.
Okay.
No.
The other job.
.
Can.
Can you guys be quiet for a second?
I'm going to have a I'm going to have somebody
speaking through my laptop, and I.
The sound is not working.
And so I'm just need to hear whether it's going
to work.
Is because there are people who work at McDonald's in
your country who are trying to be very quiet.
I work there as a student.
I was a kid.
Where it.
Where is the speaker?
Who worked there trying to raise families and pay rent
on it.
That works.
And I think part of the difference between me and
mine.
I'm not meaning to do a, , a political announcement
here.
It was just I need this.
I just need the sound on this thing to work.
Okay?
Right.
So let me get started just a second.
, right.
Okay.
Right.
So, .
Hi, everybody.
, I guess most of you or all of you
will know me.
, as well as being your lecturer for informatics one
a I'm, , exchange coordinator for School of Informatics.
So, , I'm in charge of, , giving information about,
you know, exchanges that you can go on in your
third year.
And I also am in charge of allocating who goes
where for the exchanges that informatics, the School of Informatics,
runs.
Okay, there's I'll explain the system.
, so, , so this event is just to give
you information about this and , because the applications process
is coming up very soon and some of you might
have been at events today, , run by the, ,
by sway, which stands for Study and Work Away.
I think, , they had events today in , the
Informatics forum, , publicity for this, for this thing.
And there's more things coming up.
This is going to be recorded so you can watch
it afterwards.
And there might be some people watching on live stream.
, and there's a, there's a URL here for my
FAQ, , page for exchanges.
Okay, so let me just get into it.
So I'm going to be talking for about half an
hour, and then there's going to be six students talking,
, one after the other about their experiences.
I've got one who's , visiting who's coming on live
from somewhere near the Grand Canyon, I think, , on
this on the autumn break while studying it, , Carnegie
Mellon and, , and then the others are actually physically
here talking about what they did last year.
Okay.
So this is about studying abroad in your third year,
, you would be going for a full year.
, we can't do single semester exchanges.
, we send, , you know, those sorts of numbers
of students every year abroad.
, it varies.
, I think it's about 35 right now.
, this year.
Okay.
And there's a whole lot of universities you can go
to, and there's some of them that are, , the
exchanges are run by the university as a whole, meaning
that for places on the exchange, you're competing with students
from the whole university.
And then there's others which are, , run by informatics,
and they're you're just competing with each other for places.
Okay.
, so, , and, and so there's just some universities,
there's, there's many more university.
It's called the university wide route.
And the bottom one is called the subject specific route.
Every school has its its exchanges and those are ours.
So, , university wide exchanges, there's lots of lots of
choices.
, the ones I put up, there are maybe ones
that might be of most interest to informatics students.
, , the ones that we run our are in
the bottom list.
And I'm going to talk about those in, you know,
I'm just going to go through them very quickly to
tell you what they are.
These universities and these are chosen for being, , good
places for, , computer science and artificial intelligence and ,
yes, there are some that are on both lists.
You, Penn and you, Maryland are on both lists.
, right.
Okay.
So, , so the idea is you go away for
a year and you do a year, a sort of
full load of credit at some other university.
You can choose which courses you take, , with few
restrictions.
, you go there, you do that, you you you,
, have a good time.
You learn a lot.
You have lots of interesting experiences.
And then when you come back, we check to make
sure that you did okay.
But your marks don't contribute towards your marks towards your
final degree result.
Okay.
So the third year, , doesn't contribute normally.
The third and fourth years are used to calculate your
final or for fourth, third, fourth and fifth years are
used to calculate your final degree result.
In this case, it's only your fourth year or for
fourth and fifth years.
Okay, so what you get as long as it's as
long as it's sort of, , you know, passing, ,
, the marks don't contribute, the numeric amounts don't contribute.
Okay.
So, , and why would you want to do that?
I should say, okay.
, so it's it's an exciting opportunity.
Okay.
So travel, new experiences develop as a person, you know,
all those sorts of things.
You get a chance to experience different educational approaches.
I mean, different countries do things in different ways.
And, , that's, that's useful to see things from different
sides.
, there are career benefits , , you know, development
of personal skills and getting international experience looks good on
your CV when you come to be employed and developing
cultural awareness.
, , according to, , the sway web pages, it
says that there's a correlation between people who go on
exchange and students getting good degrees first and upper
second class degrees.
I think the the causation is the other direction.
Actually, I think that the students who are tending to
be the higher flyers are the ones who decide to
go on exchanges because they're maybe up for a challenge
more than the others.
Okay.
But anyway, , there is this correlation.
And then for some of you, I'm going to certain
places on this list, there might be the benefits of
learning a new language or developing your skill in some,
in some language other than English.
I mean, many of you probably, , for many of
you, English might not be your first language anyway.
, Okay, so here are the university, , the, the
informatics owned exchanges.
So this is the going back to my list just
there.
This is the bottom the bottom list.
Okay.
I could say things about the universities on the top
list as well.
But these are the ones that we're in charge of
and that we've kind of personally gone and and set
up.
And in each case there's, there's a couple of students
who are going to go on these exchanges, , different
numbers for different universities here.
So, , EPFL, this is the first, the first list,
the first four are European universities, okay.
And the first two are Swiss universities.
These are the two best universities in Switzerland.
, and they're both very highly ranked for computer science
internationally.
So these are international rankings, you know, 10th best in
the world, ninth best in the world.
That's pretty good.
We are about 20th, , or maybe lower, actually.
there's the university rank and there's the computer science, ,
, rank.
Anyway, , so EPFL is, , is a is a
university in the French speaking speaking part of , of
Switzerland on Lake Geneva.
Beautiful, beautiful location.
, , there are some courses in French, but the
courses that you would be taking would be in English.
, you know, they're sort of the lower level courses
are in French.
, and , the other university we are partnered with
in Switzerland is, , ETH Zurich.
, and that's in the German speaking part of Switzerland,
also very highly rated for computer science.
And their lower level courses are in German.
But again, the courses you would be taking would be
in English.
Okay.
, for both of the Swiss universities here.
There's funding from the Swiss government for exchange students.
It's not enough to cover the cost of living in
Switzerland, which is kind of very high, but at least
helps.
Okay, those are the only places on this list for
which there's funding.
Okay?
, with the exception of something I'll come to later.
Okay.
The third university here is, , , in Saarbrücken in,
in, in kind of south western Germany, , near the
French border.
, so, , it's a German centre for AI, ,
the courses that they teach in computer science and I
are in English, but otherwise they teach in German.
You don't need to be able to speak German to
live in Saarbrücken.
Okay, you also don't need to be able to speak
French or German to be able to to to live
in those those places in Switzerland.
Okay.
The last one here is a new a new partner
we had, , , so, , yeah, however you pronounce
that University Autonoma do Barcelona.
Okay.
It's in Barcelona, which is a great city if you've
never been there in Spain.
, , it has, , an AI degree which is
taught in English and computer science, , as well.
Okay.
, we had another partner in Barcelona that we stopped
using because they decided to to switch to, , teaching
mostly in Catalan.
And, , it used to be that we sent students
there who could speak Spanish, but we don't have enough.
Who speaks Catalan.
So this is a this good university.
But we we couldn't, you know, we couldn't use them
because of the the language problem.
Okay, I'm just whizzing through these to give you an
idea.
Okay.
So these are all, you know, good universities in Europe
for computer science.
, I should say, by the way, numbers, , for,
, it used to be we sent to , ,
two to.
Yeah, two, two, one and two.
And now it's we've increased because of the demand for
the Swiss universities.
We've increased this to four, three, one and two.
The numbers that we're sending.
So more this coming year than we've had in the
past, , usually we, we have exchanges with two students
per, per destination.
Carnegie Mellon is absolutely top in computer science.
, it says here second for computer science.
, I would actually I mean, MIT I think is
first I would put Carnegie Mellon higher than, than MIT
personally.
But, , , so this is .
, this is a very desirable place to go.
It's in Pittsburgh, in Pennsylvania, , which is an attractive
city.
So, Pennsylvania, you've got Philadelphia on one end and Pittsburgh
on the other end, and in between, it's very rural.
Okay.
So those are the two good cities in Pennsylvania.
, right.
We can only send one student there.
So that's very, , much in demand.
Okay.
, the next one is, , University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign.
So this is, , you know, another good university for
computer science.
It's in a rural part of Illinois, so it's kind
of Midwest.
.
, not it's it's it's within reach of Chicago.
If you if you want to spend some hours on
a on a bus or a train.
Okay.
If you want to go to Chicago.
So otherwise it's in the middle of, of, of, you
know, countryside.
I'm very good for computer science.
, we send two students there.
University of Maryland is near Washington, D.C. it's in a
kind of a it's a it's a it's a it's
well, a small city that's basically just the university.
, and it's called a public Ivy University.
So you've heard of the Ivy League in the US.
So these are universities that are regarded as, , equivalent
level to the Ivy League universities, but they're public universities
instead of private universities.
Okay.
, I visited there.
I think they have a very similar kind of view
of, of informatics as, as we have here.
So they have quite broad range of, of courses covering
things that, , you know, are not normally taught in,
in computer science departments we do here, you know,
stuff neuro informatics.
, okay.
More American universities.
University of Pennsylvania is and is in Philadelphia.
So between New York and Washington DC, Ivy League university,
Donald Trump went there.
If that makes any difference to you.
, very good for computer science.
, I mean, anything in the top 100.
You know, I'm giving ranks here.
Anything in the top 100?
Well, let's say 50 or 70 or something.
Is is excellent.
, you know, top universities in the world.
So, , very good university.
, you know, Ivy League, , great computer science department.
, and we send four students there and the university,
this is also on the university, , list of destinations.
And I don't think we get more than four because
I think the others University sends Many more than four
students to the University of Pennsylvania.
It was the very first exchange destination for the university.
And , but I think we get our for and
then the rest of them go to students from the
rest of the university.
Okay.
University of Southern California is and is in LA.
, and we just started it this year, so I
don't have much experience there.
Students there right now.
, , it's, .
Yeah.
I don't know what to say about that.
I mean, la, you know, you can go surfing, ,
or do all the other things that one does in,
in Southern California.
, and it's a good university.
, we have a brand new, , , partner at
Cornell University.
It's on the list of university destinations, but now it's
also, , Informatics, , exchange.
So it's new this coming year.
That is to say, it's, , I'll be sending students
there, , you know, 20, 25, 26, , 2025, 2026.
It's in, , Ithaca, New York.
So that's near Niagara Falls, relatively near Niagara Falls.
So it's nowhere near Manhattan and New York City.
It's the other end of, , New York State.
And New York State is large.
So, , it's a it's a very pleasant, , ,
kind of rural location.
, the main thing in Ithaca is the university.
It's an Ivy League university.
It's very good for computer science.
, yeah.
And then finally on this list is Northwestern University, which
is, , in a suburb of Chicago.
And I don't know if this one's going to be.
I think it's going to be available next year, but
we haven't signed the contracts yet and so it's not
completely sure.
I think judging from the stage at which things are
at, I'm almost certain it's going to be it's going
to be on the list for next year.
Okay.
, so it is one of the ones you can
choose in your preference list.
, there's just a little question mark about what will
happen until we've actually got signatures on contracts.
Okay.
So those are the destinations for informatics students.
, and that includes , with with some provisos.
That includes joint degree students.
Okay.
So some of these are not for joint degree students
this.
This one University of Southern California.
, only for , you know, informatics students and electronics
and computer science.
Okay.
So if you're doing maths and computer science or something,
that's not for you, okay.
But generally these are also for joint degree students.
Okay.
So the way this works is that you apply I
think the application is open at the end of October.
I don't remember the date exactly, but they close, ,
it says they're in the middle of November.
, you can give, , a choice of five, ,
universities in ranked order.
So first of all, you can make two applications, one
for the informatics exchanges and one for the university wide
exchanges.
And you can give for each of those.
You can give a list of five destinations you want
in order.
Okay.
, you know first first choice, second choice, third choice
down to fifth choice.
They can be different choices, obviously.
, and the selection is based on the academic results
in your first year.
, and you have to write a, a little essay,
personal statement.
, the, the personal statement is taken.
It's a serious part of the, , of the allocation
process for the university wide, , exchanges.
, for the for the informatics exchanges, I, I take
it into account, but it's not it's not a very
significant part of the decision on who goes where.
Okay.
So, , , it's it's necessary that you submit it.
, but, , but I'm looking mainly at academic results.
Okay.
I'll also interview all of the candidates for the subject
specific applicant, , exchanges.
Okay.
Short, short interview, mainly just to find out who you
are.
, not it's not something you're going to pass or
fail.
I just want to get to meet you, , before
I make this decision, the, .
The process, the selection process is moderate to highly competitive,
which is strongly dependent on destination.
So I get I get, you know, 30 students who
want to go to Carnegie Mellon University.
Okay.
So only one gets to go, , , you know,
whereas for some of the other places, , it's much
easier to get a place, obviously.
Okay.
And offers will be made in late December to mid-January.
And there's a, there's a kind of a sequence of,
, things that happens.
You get an offer, you decide whether to accept or
not.
And then there's a second phase of, , offering the
places that are left over to students who haven't got
an offer the first time around.
Okay.
It's explained in the, , sueh web pages.
Now, the way this works with, , with finance is
that you don't have to pay tuition fees at your
host university, which is a relief for the American universities,
especially because they charge a lot more than Edinburgh University
does, but you do need to pay Edinburgh University fees
if you're somebody who has to pay Edinburgh University fees.
It varies, , depending on, you know, so Scottish students
don't have to pay university fees in Scotland for example.
Okay.
, you need to cover all your other costs yourself,
, travel accommodation etcetera, etcetera, etcetera.
Okay.
There might be some small fees at the host university,
things , , access to, I don't know, sports facilities
or something.
Okay.
, there is.
So when, when, when the UK, , when we had
Brexit, , the UK left a scheme called Erasmus, which
was for funding exchanges and, , generous funding scheme for
going to European universities on exchange.
, and , Boris Johnson said, oh, we're going to
have something much better.
It's going to be called the Turing grant.
Okay.
And so there are Turing grants, but the government has
not funded them adequately.
And so, , in place of this generous funding scheme
for European university exchanges, we have a barely funded scheme
for worldwide exchanges.
And what that means is that basically nobody from Informatics
gets any money because it's used for funding things ,
, students who are studying, , you know, foreign languages
who are required to go abroad to do, , ,
you know, to the country which, which languages that they're,
that they're, that they're doing to, to do a sort
of language assistant placement.
Okay.
It is it is available also for students who are
have kind of family circumstances which mean that there, ,
you know, widening access is the terminology for, for students,
for example, whose family nobody in their family has ever
been to university.
Such students can can sometimes get some money from this,
but otherwise you're out of luck.
Okay.
, you need to finance this yourself.
, okay.
, when you go on an exchange, you choose courses
that correspond somewhat to the courses you would have taken
in Edinburgh for a year.
Three insofar as possible.
In the end, you you can you can take pretty
much what you want, except that, , has to be
a full load.
It has to be mainly computer science or whatever your
degree is.
And , , if your course, if your degree program
requires computer security, which almost all third year degree programs
in computer science and and joint degrees require.
Then that's the course you should take when you're on
a when you're abroad.
But really, I encourage you to take advantage of the
opportunities you have to do things that you might not
have the opportunities to do here.
Okay.
And, , important is to think about the prerequisites of
the courses that you're going to be taking in the
fourth year because you might need to get, I don't
know, machine learning or something, or natural language processing if
you want to take certain courses in your fourth year.
, I've already said marks don't contribute to the final
degree classification.
So the result for the final degree is based on
your final year marks only, and you have to be
a little bit careful with some of the restrictions at
the host universities.
, , sometimes you're not allowed to take courses, very
many courses outside the department that your, , going on
exchange with.
Okay.
So this this varies from, , from case to case.
So I can't say anything in general.
It's something you'd have to figure out when you, when
you look at the universities and decide what courses you're
taking.
Okay.
And there's a bunch of questions that I'm not going
to answer right now, but they're answered in this, ,
at this URL down at the bottom here.
This is my frequently asked questions list.
Okay.
.
Are there any questions at this point?
I have about five minutes.
And then my first, , student talk is coming up.
Anybody?
Yeah.
So about prerequisites for your courses, how do we know
that we have to take them?
Or is it more of a weighted case where during
the course, it takes something that will help you with
your form?
Okay.
So, , You've walked out of the park.
Okay, so the way the way it works.
So there's I'm thinking of a specific course, , which
has it's in fourth year course here.
It requires quite a lot of prerequisites in natural language
and machine learning area.
I don't remember what it's called, but, , if you
want to take that course.
So if you are a student at Edinburgh University and
you haven't gone an exchange, then you can't take that
course unless you've taken the courses that are listed as
prerequisites.
If you've been on exchange, that requirement is relaxed.
So you won't have taken those courses because you won't
have been here to take those courses.
Okay.
But you're expected to have learned the material that's involved
in those courses.
And so if you look at your fourth year choices
and you decide, oh, I have a burning desire to
take that course, then you should be making sure that
when you're on exchange that you get courses that give
you the background or, you know, it could be that
you need to do a little bit of self-study to
fill in some gaps.
All right.
So, , it might you might be disappointed if you
if you go and make all of your choices without
looking at what it is that you want to do
in fourth year here.
Okay.
Anybody else?
Yeah.
, so you mentioned that, , academic results in the
first year.
Those are most important for going to a competitive uni.
Yeah.
, however, if you have a lot of extracurriculars,
good results in competitions and stuff that.
, what's the level of influence it will have on
your decision?
, yeah.
So, , small, small level of influence.
I'm looking.
I'm looking at course marks.
, mostly.
Okay, I will, you know, if those things are in
your.
Yeah.
, small, small, small influence.
Okay.
Yeah.
They're available for every second.
You said it for a couple of months, but yeah.
Okay.
Let me go back.
Let me go back.
Okay.
, sorry.
Which one?
Starting from Sierra.
Starting from Maryland.
Okay, so the American universities, I.
So I think I'll just go through the whole list.
Okay.
, Carnegie Mellon one.
Oh, actually, let me go back here.
Okay.
, , EPFL for, , ETH Zurich.
Three.
So universities one , Barcelona.
Two Carnegie Mellon.
One , Illinois.
, two Maryland two.
Pennsylvania four.
USC two.
Cornell two.
Northwestern two.
Okay.
And going back to the university list, it varies.
And I don't know I don't know how many there
are.
If there's a database somewhere that I could look it
up if you really need to know.
But, .
.
Okay.
Somebody else?
Yeah.
The percentage of students that applied to this program,
the whole class, the percentage that apply, or the percentage
who are successful.
Okay.
, okay, we send about 35 this year, I think,
or 30 maybe.
I think 50 applied out of all of the students
who could apply.
So that's not a huge number.
And most of them were successful.
A most I mean, two thirds.
Okay.
Anybody else?
, I saw you first.
Sorry.
You talked to to speak up.
To university.
Did you say language certificates?
Yeah.
Okay.
, language certificates?
, yes.
, however, I think it's automatic if you if you've,
, if you've been admitted here, you will have had
to submit a language certificate.
And I think that then, , most universities will accept
that as evidence that you have the English language proficiency.
And for the universities where there's, , for those universities
listed which are not in English speaking places, , none
of them require a language certificate for that language.
Okay.
, there was a question back there, and I'm soon
going to have to cut this off because, .
Yeah.
Okay.
Yeah, yeah.
Send the USC joint programs.
Right.
Thus, I am committed to a program.
No, that doesn't count as a joint program.
And then there was a question somewhere here.
Yeah.
, I'm on a student visa.
If I'm away for a year, how does that work?
I yeah, I don't know how it works with student
visas, and I'm not allowed to give advice on that.
So you have to ask the the part of the
universe that deals with that kind of thing.
I think.
I think it can be arranged, but I don't know
anything about the details.
Okay.
All right.
, I'm going to now, , move to Aurora, and
I hope she's here.
It looks she's here.
, so let me see.
Aurora, can you hear me?
I can't hear you.
Oh, you're you're muted.
Aurora, can you hear me?
Yeah.
Can you hear me?
Yes, now I can okay so wait a second I
the audio is not working here so I have to
fiddle with a little microphone okay.
so, , I can't see anything, though.
If you have a presentation, I can't see it.
Yes.
Wait a minute.
Okay.
Your presentation is coming up.
Great.
Okay.
, right.
So, , Aurora is going to Carnegie Mellon University.
She's told me she's on a trip for her, ,
, autumn break.
And so, , she's somewhere in Grand Canyon.
And the Grand Canyon.
Yeah.
Okay, good.
So go.
Go ahead.
Okay.
So hi, guys.
I'm going to talk about my exchange currently.
In this overview about CMU, , called Carnegie Mellon.
Which I only found out after I came here.
Didn't realise that.
And then the whole campus is very Scottish theme.
Our mascot is a Scottish terrier.
And then there are people playing bagpipes on campus, which
is very much a shock to me because I did
not expect that.
So, , about its academic background, it's ranked number one
in computer science title MIT in the US.
So it's good for AI, cybersecurity, computer systems, programming languages,
and basically almost every computer science field.
And the academic year is from August to May.
So during the start of the year, , the freshmen
would kind of make this whole CMU photo.
And then this is our statue.
It's not very it's just a it's called walking towards
the sky, I think.
And then this was actually last week when there was
Northern Lights, this was taken over.
Or over the campus.
Okay.
You're you're, .
So in general, I sorry.
I'm just saying the audio is not great, but carry
on.
Okay.
, do you need me to repeat anything?
No, I think that's okay so far.
Okay.
, okay.
So, .
For life in Pittsburgh, I'd say costs and accommodation wise.
, it's more expensive than Edinburgh.
Buying groceries is more expensive.
, eating out is usually also more expensive because you
have to tip.
And I didn't manage to get on campus housing because
of a whole fiasco.
over registered there for years or something.
But I'd say for campus housing, they're all double rooms.
So if you do manage to get, , accommodation, you'd
have to share with a stranger.
And then for campus food, it's decent, but I would
not recommend buying meal blocks because you can actually buy
them for cheaper off the freshman or other people who
bought too many.
And exchange blocks with other people.
.
Far away from campus because the nearest Aldi was
is 25 minutes walk away from for me.
And , there's also a huge target, but then you'd
have to take the bus to get there, so it's
not very walkable in general.
, with our CMU student ID, you can get free
bus just the young Scot card.
But, , it's also better to just be friends, ,
with someone with a car, because although the bus is
free, it doesn't come very, , frequently or on time.
So I'd recommend just befriending someone with the car and
having them drive you.
, so for things to do in Pittsburgh, there are
games, , American games.
You have baseball.
The team in Pittsburgh is Pirates football, the team of
Steelers and, , hockey, the Columbus Penguins.
I've been to a baseball game once, didn't really know
what was going on, but it was worth the experience.
There were fireworks and then there's an incline.
So, , the top left photo is the incline.
Something is right off.
And look at this table.
There's the Botanic Garden, and it's really pretty.
It's really near campus as well.
You can just walk there and show them your ID
and they'll let you in for free.
The theme changes every month or so, and the recent
theme was Under the sea.
So hence the cloud and everything.
Okay.
So, , academic life, , Carnegie Mellon University is a
very tough university.
There's a lot of workload.
, although although that, , there are a lot of
courses to choose from, basically everything within C is
that you can think of, there probably is a course
because, , there are courses within and outside the School
of Computer Science.
, apart from there's also information that working institute,
there's cybersecurity institute, there's electrical engineering.
They all offer CSE related courses.
So there's just really a lot of courses to choose
from.
, and we can also take undergrad or post-grad courses.
Adding on to the options.
, there's also this really thing called student.
Students.
And they're also usually really fun and really chill.
It's not one of the main courses that you would
take.
It's something you add on.
But it's a really interesting experience because the courses are
taught by students and they're all usually on a fun
topic.
Currently, I'm taking one on Brooklyn Nine-Nine, so that's
pretty fun.
, for my workload, I'd say it really depends on
the course, but most of the undergrad CSE courses are
very intensive.
, my friends are also doing other CSE,
postgrad courses, and there's still a lot of, , projects
to do.
, for undergrad courses, it's roughly one homework per week
per course that take around 6 to 8 hours
to complete.
I'd say one homework is kind of a coursework
from, let's say, Iads or something.
And then for each course, it varies by course obviously,
but usually there are two midterms and one final.
And my my culture shock was when there are
no assignment there are.
Completing the assignments and studying for the midterm.
But office hours are basically, , we have them in
Edinburgh too, but I think it's not as big as
a big other thing here.
People line up to go to office hours, and usually
it's a really long line, and people ask about homework
or things about the courses that they don't understand.
It's a really big culture among them, and the Tas
are also students, so it's a bonding experience, I guess.
So for research, you can contact professors and ask them
to if you want to help with their research.
, so CMU offers independent study credits that you can
take.
So if you want to do research and you want
them to count towards your degree, you can speak with
the academic advisor, but.
And then you can turn that into a course.
, it's easier to just, , reach out to a
professor that you're taking a course in, because usually if
you just call the email, they won't respond because they
have so many emails that they received a day.
Okay.
So for extracurriculars.
all the work and stuff, but it is quite.
Similar to Edinburgh.
, there's this one cool one that's called CMU explorers,
where they plan group trips to nature sites.
I did acapella back in Edinburgh, so I'm doing acapella
here as well.
And there's a lot of free dancing classes that
I can take, which I started doing once I came
to CMU.
And obviously the sports clubs are, , competitive ones,
they call them varsity.
And then there are the non-competitive ones, which are just
intramural and chill.
I personally did not really join the Greek life.
But if you want to invest your thing, there's also
that, , people are really into it.
There's the American colleges are known for their Greek
life and stuff.
I say the party scene isn't that great here, though,
because everyone's just distressed with working.
, but then there's this really cool thing called the
Spring Carnival, which is in the spring semester.
So it's a basically a whole the uni turns
into a carnival site for a couple of days.
So.
from scratch with.
Electrical stuff and that , just build a whole.
Things that, .
Yeah.
So apart from studying, you can also take trips around
the country whenever you're free.
, currently it's the fall break, so I'm in the
Grand Canyon.
We also went to Vegas, and this is a group
photo that we took in the Antelope Canyon a couple
of days ago.
Okay, so this is some pros and cons of studying
at CMU.
Some pros are that there are really great courses and
lecturers you really do learn a lot, even though
there's a lot of work, I feel the work
really adds on.
It kind of makes sure that because you're working
constantly, it's always on your mind.
So you actually learn a lot of stuff.
You get to meet really, really smart and talented people.
, all the exchange students are really smart.
All the regular students are really smart.
I feel , , I think there's one exchange student
from picking you who, , got second place in the
Icpc, which is actually just crazy.
.
Photo is actually a talk by the Google CEO.
I'd to see her in person.
And, , there's another pro is it's a small
exchange cohort.
I think it's around 30 to 40 students.
The exchange program itself is really small.
So you get to be really close to the exchange
students.
, I'm going on this trip with my exchange friends.
So, , this is also a photo I took from
the Niagara Falls from when I did a weekend trip
to Toronto.
, cons.
It is a lot of work, so if you're prepared
to work, then you should come here.
If you're not, if you want to go on exchange
or have, , fun and party, I feel CMU
is not the place for you.
, and it also can be hard to make friends
in classes because the classes are really big and you
don't really interact with people outside of class.
You just kind of sit there.
And unlike Edinburgh, because Edinburgh has a set core
structure, you kind of know everyone within informatics.
But then for CMU, you have people from different courses,
all taking random courses, and everyone.
Is taking exactly the same courses as you.
You have to meet .
For that class.
And one of the last con would be for
work life balance.
, I've had for midterm season, I've had
a couple of days where I only had four hours
of sleep because of just work.
There's just a lot of work in general, but if
you can get past that, honestly, I think it's worth
it because it's really fun and you really do learn
a lot.
, bottom right photo is just me with my acapella
group.
This is just us in the reception.
Okay, so this would be the end of my presentation.
I wanted to say.
Time for.
Questions.
Okay, thanks.
Thanks.
Aurora.
We have time for 1 or 2 questions.
Who?
Who has a question about CMU?
Anybody?
No question.
Stunned silence.
There's one.
How big are the classes?
Was the question.
So it depends on whether you're taking undergrad or post-grad
classes.
Undergrad classes are pretty big there.
They vary from 100 to 200 people.
And people, because it's just a really small room.
And then it's.
Is that all right?
I mean, the audio broke up in the second half,
but never mind.
Is there another question?
Yeah.
On the worst day of the week.
Explain more about the what workload.
Explain more about the workload per day or per week.
Yeah.
Can you say something?
Okay, so back to my slide.
, so I'm currently taking, , four undergrad classes, so
there are no three undergrad classes in one post grad
class.
And , for the undergrad classes, there are homeworks every
week.
And they're usually released one week ahead.
So you get exactly one week to do them.
And they all take a roughly 6 to 8 hours
to complete for homework.
So I'd say, , apart from that you also have
to do readings for classes.
So it's a lot of prep to.
Yeah.
And lectures I guess.
Okay.
So you have to make sure that you actually caught
up to courses.
Okay.
, I think this would be a good time to
stop, , because we have the next talk coming up.
So thanks very much, Aurora, for taking the trouble and
enjoy your trip.
Okay.
And thank you.
Okay.
Right.
Thanks.
Bye bye.
Okay.
, this is the next one.
So, .
Yeah.
So we have a sequence of students who are actually
physically here.
So this is going to be a little bit simpler.
, let me just get your, , talk ready.
.
Is there any.
.
No.
.
I will stand here then.
I've got the.
I've got the PDF version.
You probably.
Do you want PDF or do you mind or do
you want, , I think actually this PowerPoint, , it's
possible this would work with a clicker.
Let's see.
Wait a minute.
You don't have any notes for you?
No.
That's okay.
Okay, so let me just see if this works.
I don't think it works.
This other one works.
Sorry, it doesn't work.
That one.
I don't.
The problem is I don't have the gadget with my
in my in mind.
That's fine.
I'll click here.
Yeah.
Okay.
So just press return.
Okay.
And there's the microphone.
Go ahead.
Yeah.
So we went to Hong Kong University last year.
hi everyone.
I went to HKU last year.
I got back in June.
, I had an amazing time and I would really
recommend going on exchange overall.
, this is a photo of the sunset view of
the campus.
, we had a really amazing, , campus that was
, located on a hill.
You could see all the buildings around Hong Kong is
known for its many skyscrapers.
, I think the most high skyscrapers in any city
in the world.
, so I'll start with a little bit about general
life there, and then I'll talk about student life a
bit more.
So, , yeah, I really wanted to go somewhere a
bit different for my exchange.
I'm a dual national, EU and UK citizen, so I
can live there the rest of my life, and I
hope to move to a few more places, but I
wanted to go somewhere very different.
For me personally, I wasn't that interested in going to
America.
I just really wanted to go somewhere very different from
wherever I've lived before.
So Hong Kong was great for that.
, it's a really, really unique place and there were
many.
So what's being covered here is one, , is a
fire dragon dance from the Middleton Festival.
, Hong Kong is well known for its hiking.
It's a really dense city, but actually there's a lot
of hiking in nature around as well.
Just 20 minutes ferry can get you to really peaceful
island getaways.
, so it can be a very bustling city, but
it's also lots of nature around as well.
And that's one of the parks.
And you can see the buildings above it.
, so for accommodation, I would say, , University accommodation
is definitely recommended.
I'll see if I can move the.
Can you can you find that?
Oh.
.
Yeah.
Yeah.
If it's going to be okay.
Okay.
, so, , yeah, I would say it's very difficult
to find your own private accommodation in Hong Kong.
, there is university accommodation, but it is very limited.
So you have to apply very early.
And the the application opens at 3 a.m. UK time.
So, , but what I've been told is that you
absolutely have to do it when it opens.
I did get university accommodation.
I was very grateful for that.
Some people would prefer not to go into university accommodation
because they do have quite strict rules, especially if you're
used to the UK.
We have, , student accommodation.
There's no people monitoring who goes in or out
or anything this.
In Hong Kong it's much more strict about I had
to scan my card twice to get into the building.
, there were no visitors allowed.
After 11 p.m. I was allowed, I think, up to
two guests at once in my college.
And, , it's supposed to be , , single gender
floors.
And after 11 p.m., you're not supposed to be on
the other floor.
It kind of depends how strict your floor is.
But when I heard that the first time, that turned
me off a bit, but, , I still had a
fine time on my ear abroad is it's.
The accommodation is cheap, so that was the benefit of
it.
Private accommodation will be much more expensive and harder to
find, and possibly quite complicated for you to arrange a
contract.
, in Cantonese or something.
, they have a different selection of, , more traditional
halls, which are mostly Cantonese speaking people or more international
halls.
I heard it was a bit harder to make friends
if you don't speak Cantonese to go in a more
traditional hall, so I chose to go into a more
international one.
It was still about 5050, so I still made local
friends in my hall, and they're all quite a lot
more activity based.
So you have your own college or hall and you
do activities with your floor a bit.
And if you're a normal student, you actually have to
reapply to get into the same hall the next year
based on how much activities you did.
So that can be fun.
If you want to get to know people in your
whole life.
As an extension, you don't have to participate if you
don't want to.
And they're also all pretty much majority double rooms.
So I did have a roommate and that is probably
the case if you go in university accommodation.
, I also shared a kitchen with 22 people, but
this generally wasn't really a problem because we all ate
out so much of the time.
, so actually, I didn't really care if food was
a lot cheaper to buy out, and it was not
that cost effective for me to, , cook my own
food.
really.
So I got to eat on campus a lot.
I went out to lots of different restaurants, tried lots
of great food.
I love that part.
I had to learn how to cook again more often
myself when I got back.
, yeah, less than a Tesco meal deal to get
a nice hot meal on campus.
So amazing.
And I loved it.
So easy to just go and meet up with friends.
Food.
It's not a big deal.
You just say, oh, let's go get some dinner later.
it's not a big deal.
, the Metro is amazing.
Super convenient and cheap.
I've heard from one of my friends now who is
in America that is super hard to get around LA.
So I loved how it was super easy to get
around Hong Kong.
You get 50% discount with your student card.
Yeah, it's so easy to get around.
, there, the university has its own metro stop, and
it's it was one stop away from where I lived,
and it's really convenient to get to everywhere.
, it is a seasonal climate still, but right now
it's very hot.
, I personally enjoyed that.
The winter wasn't that cold.
I'm having to get used to Scottish winter again, but,
, when I arrived, it was it was very hot
and sweaty, so I had to get used to that.
And, , I also had three major weather events and
my first month of being there, including in the first
week, the most severe typhoon the Hong Kong has ever
had in five years.
But they you just have to download an app.
You get warnings, they tell you to stay on site.
It's generally fine as long as you .
Take care of yourself and don't go outside when they
tell you not to.
, it is , official languages are Cantonese and English,
and Mandarin is widely spoken as well.
, a fair amount of people, , won't speak English,
but you'll totally be able to get by without any
Chinese knowledge or Cantonese.
, but I took two university Cantonese courses as part
of my credits, and I think that was really beneficial
for me to actually be able to understand a bit
more of what was going on around me, order my
own food and drinks, and yeah, I just really ,
loved being a bit more part of it.
If I understood a bit more of what's going on
around me is very difficult language to learn, but I
think it's well worth trying.
, yeah, it's a bit different from the UK and
this might be a bit hard at first.
, some things are hard.
Some things I enjoyed.
, you have to be willing to embrace the fact
that it will be quite different from you, and it
will push you a bit out of your comfort zone,
especially at first.
But I think it's made me a lot more confident.
And yeah, I really enjoyed getting to experience that.
, yeah, it's a big city.
There's so much to do, but it doesn't feel unmanageable.
It's really easy to get around.
It feels very safe.
, and it has good nightlife.
, if you're interested in what Hong Kong is ,
I would definitely recommend searching up YouTube videos, vlogs, food
shopping, culture, history, things that.
I think this is also a good point to mention
that, , the political situation in Hong Kong is is
quite complicated.
, personally, I didn't feel that that affected me negatively
in any way on my exchange.
But you will notice that, , that that is quite
tense in Hong Kong.
, and I would definitely recommend researching that before you
go.
, there's been some quite strong laws put in
place recently, and that is affecting what Hong Kong people
say.
And if you try and talk to them about it,
they will be a bit about it.
So definitely research it.
I wouldn't say it's a reason not to go, but
it does make me consider.
I learned that actually everyone who graduates from Edinburgh can
get a visa to look for a job in Hong
Kong for two years.
You don't have to already have a company sponsoring you,
which is very cool, but the political situation does make
me reconsider if I would want to go and move
there and work there, , indefinitely, as opposed to doing
an exchange.
.
Student life.
So this is us in the the Taiwan study area.
So there's a library and a more casual study area.
, the metro station, the Hong Kong famous wall.
That's one of my classes where I could see the
sea.
, I would say that it's pretty intense, maybe a
bit more intense than Edinburgh, but probably not as intense
as CMU.
, I found because we, , courses are a bit
smaller, but you have to take still the equivalent number
of credits.
So I had to take five courses each semester.
, and I had more frequent assignments from five courses
at a time.
So that did feel quite a lot of work.
, I had a lot of, , overlapping assignments that
were due this course, this course, next two weeks,
next weeks, , all at once.
, so that did feel a bit more intense.
And here where it's more you have three coursework
in a semester and they, , are more sequential.
, I really the campus nature.
Edinburghs more city campus.
, but this is more compact altogether.
Lots of cafes, lots placed on campus.
, and I just went to campus, walked around.
It has , it's very warm and lots of plants
and tropical.
Feels a bit more tropical.
, And yeah, for classes as well.
HC mandates that you take at least 50% from your
faculty.
So for a computer science, that's the faculty of engineering.
And that includes all, , engineering faculty classes.
So Edinburgh does mandate that you take a bit more
computer science than that.
, but it's most computer science people at HKU will
not take five CS courses each semester because that is
far too much workload.
Normal students are supposed to take 1 to 2 Common
Core courses each year, which is courses that anyone
from any subject can take.
, and they generally have more group projects and are
a bit less intense than the higher level CS courses.
So I did one of those as well.
, which was quite interesting, went a bit deeper in
the metaverse and still talked about AI and other things.
So I found that quite fun.
, most of the CSE courses I was on had
a 50% exam, so I did have four exams in
the first semester and three in the second, which was
a bit more than I'm used to here.
And the sign up for courses also happens at 3
a.m. UK time.
I would recommend also waking up for that, because some
of the popular courses are tough to get, and your
best chance is to .
You can have them already in your basket before the
opens, and if you put that in as soon as
it opens, that's your best chance to get the course
you want.
But the normal students are still prioritised above the exchange
students, so you may end up not getting some of
the ones you want, but I still ended up with
pretty good choices, so that was fine for me, I
think.
Maybe not as intense as some of the other places
I heard of.
, yeah.
I would also say there's a lot of international students
at HKU.
It's well known for being very international.
It can be a bit harder to make friends with
local students if you don't speak any Cantonese.
But in general, there's lots of international students.
There's a huge amount of exchange students.
, there were, I think 15 exchange students from Edinburgh
alone, , at HQ from different subjects.
, and I made friends with some of them.
I think we try not to stick together too much
because you don't leave at home or just make friends
with only Adam or people, but, , it's very fun.
a huge, , group people to hang out with,
, costs.
So one thing I haven't mentioned here, actually, is that
I am a, .
It depends what kind of fee paying student you are,
but I'm a rest of UK English fee paying
student, and my, , fees were actually halved for the
exchange.
So instead of paying 9000 something, I only paid 4000
something, which also adds into how much.
And I think you can get slightly more maintenance loan
if you're on an exchange.
, the flights were obviously the one big one
off cost at the start.
, that is quite expensive.
If you you're going to have to try and wait
until after you get your visa to book your flights.
But as long as you can do it will save
you money.
Accommodation I found to be much cheaper than I normally
pay in Edinburgh, so I paid about £270 a month.
, that's about half as much as I pay in
Edinburgh.
And I did have to share a room, but that
meant I could go out to eat a lot and
do a lot of other things, and I didn't have
to worry about it that much.
I heard some things from American exchange students that they
had to save up a lot of money before they
went, and I generally didn't find that to be as
much an issue.
Going to Hong Kong, except for Hong Kong is
known to be a very expensive city, but that's mostly
on, , living costs and rent.
And actually other costs are not so bad, especially food
and transport and things that.
, student visa cost me £100.
I had to post documents to Hong Kong, but it
went fine.
, and the insurance you can get from the university,
you're not mandated to take out any other insurance.
, if you want, you can get extra.
And I estimate that I spent around that much on
food and travel.
, I would say before I went on exchange or
things I was most worried about were leaving Edinburgh for
a year.
, I'm not yet feeling super settled.
At the time I was thinking of applying to go
somewhere.
I'd have to leave again in a year and then
only be back in Edinburgh for one more year.
, and I would say this generally has been fine.
I stayed friends with all my friends from Edinburgh before,
, I had an amazing time in Hong Kong.
I met lots of friends there from lots of different
places.
Somehow I've got more friends in Edinburgh because my friends
here branched out.
So, , I have more friends on my course from
people they met.
I have I did an internship in Edinburgh over the
summer, met friends and work, and I, two of the
people from , I made friends in Hong Kong, also
came back to Edinburgh.
So that's really nice.
, and my other worry was that fourth year would
be more intense, which I think is true so far
it's manageable.
I am a bit worried about my coursework that's worth
50% of a 20 credit course due tomorrow, because that
counts for 8.3% of my entire university grade.
, but I had a lot of fun in Hong
Kong, and I knew that this year would be time
to work, and I'm okay with that.
, yeah, I have a few more pictures.
Sorry.
It's time.
Yeah.
, I have, yeah.
Questions now.
So the, , I'll put all of these presentations on,
, you know, I'll link them all so you can
look at the pictures later, if you .
Okay.
Yeah.
.
Any questions?
You can also email me anything.
Anybody?
Okay.
Oh, there's one great question.
.
My grades.
I wouldn't say they were, , super high.
I think I had pretty good grades overall.
, I wrote a good essay as well.
I scored well in that component, and I had pretty
high.
I had one of my courses was not so good,
but my top three courses were quite good, so that
helped me.
But I would definitely say apply even if you don't
have the best grades, because, , it's based on more
than just your grades and don't rule yourself out too
early?
Yep.
Did you support things .
Academic intentions.
And cool off and were , I want to go
there as a.
Place to live?
, yeah.
So for the personal statement, they specifically ask you to
answer, sort of three bullet points.
, one is about, , how you would be a
good ambassador of Edinburgh.
One is about why you want to go for academic
reasons, and one is about why you want to go
for less academic reasons.
, I would say the better you answer those three
bullet points, the higher chance you have.
And yeah, especially don't rule self out grades wise, because
if you write a really good essay, that's 50% of
your score.
And personally, the essays are peer reviewed by other students.
I read one of them was really way better than
the rest.
So you're automatically getting a bit a better score and
you can do really well even if you have less
grades.
If you have really good reasons for why you want
to go and you explain that.
I write about, , things I take part in, in
Edinburgh, clubs and societies.
You can right by that as well.
Yeah.
There's, there's one but it has to be quick, okay.
Because we're out of time.
Yep.
, your life to itself.
, I applied through Edinburgh Uni, so I applied the
university wide route, not the computer science route, which is
basically the same thing, but you have different universities you
can go to.
Yeah.
Thanks.
Yeah, thanks.
Got to move on.
Okay.
Thanks very much.
Okay.
Okay.
.
You see, so our next, , our next talk is
Selena and I have to get this presentation up.
, Selena from, , who went to the University of
Pennsylvania last year.
Let me just find the.
Right.
I just need to.
I need to find the, .
Can you just say that you find your presentation?
, sorry.
This is being very sluggish.
.
So that's you okay?
Okay.
.
Go ahead.
Okay.
So.
Yeah.
Hi.
My name is Selena.
I went to the University of Pennsylvania last year.
, so my presentation is quite short, so I'm just
going to go over some of the key points, ,
my motivations for going and some of the things
I wish I knew before going.
, so, yeah.
Why the University of Pennsylvania?
So, yeah.
So my main reason for going was that academic reasons.
So University of Pennsylvania has a wide range of courses
you can choose from.
, one of the things that was particularly, , appealing
to me was that the the idea that you could
take courses at a higher level.
So it was quite flexible to choose courses that were
postgraduate or upper undergraduate.
The requirements are quite flexible as well.
, so you can email the professor explaining, say that
you have these requirements from the University of Edinburgh and
how they translate.
And generally it's fine.
There are a couple of courses which have more stricter
requirements, but that's on a case by case basis and
those are generally more specialised, specialised.
, so generally it's expected that you take four
courses per semester.
So this is equivalent to fourth course units.
You have a maximum of 5.5.
But it's generally not recommended to take 5.5 units worth
of courses, as these courses are a lot more intense
than the ones from this university.
, so the courses are on the first come, first
serve basis.
So before you arrive at the University of Pennsylvania, you
need to manually apply yourself for these courses through their
application portal called Penn.
, what?
One thing I wish I knew before going is that,
, we do not get access to advanced registration before
for the first semester, so most of the other students
for the first semester would have already registered.
So it's a lot more, , intensive, you know, sign
on for your the courses you're interested in for the
first semester.
But it generally worked out fine because you have two
weeks at the start of the semester to change courses.
, it's there add drop or swap period.
, one other good thing about University of Pennsylvania is
that it really enables you to, , study courses outside
of the scope of computer science.
So I know a lot of people in the past
have studied, , taking courses from the business school.
So Wharton School of Business, which is quite famous, I
personally went and took a couple of computational biology courses,
, which I had an interest in at the time.
So one of the reasons I highly recommend going on
a stage in the University of Pennsylvania is it really
provides you with a different perspectives perspective on learning.
So I found that the courses were extremely well taught
and emphasised engagement from the students.
So there were a lot more interactive office hours and
recitations in order to ensure that you actually know the
content.
The assignments were also a lot more intensive, so I
think I had either weekly or bi weekly assignments.
So often you have multiple up to 3 to 4
deadlines in a week.
You also have midterms.
And these assignments are normally built up built on each
other.
So at the end you get something that is, ,
very applicable and you can put on your CV.
, one thing to note is that UPenn puts a
lot of emphasis on group assignments.
So if you really don't working in a group,
it might not be something for you.
, yeah.
So besides academic reasons, , I also had some personal
reasons for travelling from going on exchange.
So these involved getting to new to know a new
culture, , travel and the social aspect of it.
So yeah, travel.
So, , the UPenn is located in Philadelphia, which is
one of the largest cities.
, it has a really interesting culture.
It's also about two hours away from New York, which
I highly recommend visiting, and Washington, DC, which I regret
not visiting.
, so yeah, so obviously you're close to New York,
so that gives you access to a lot of, ,
museums.
, you have access to Broadway as well.
, so if you musicals, that's obviously a good
place to visit.
, yeah.
, on the social side of things in the university
itself.
So Penn organises a lot of events.
So I think within the first week the new
student society, organisation, , organise a bunch of events
for exchange students, new students and transfer students to get
to know each other.
So these involve dinners, , couple of talks.
, they're really well organised and I definitely recommend going
to get to know other people who are there for
similar purpose to you.
, they also organise, , a couple of careers events,
, which I also highly recommend going.
, it's a very career driven university, so they are
happy to help with your CV or to discuss potential
, , directions.
You can take your career.
, UPenn also features a wide range of different societies,
, very similar to Edinburgh.
, so depending on what your interests are, there are
a couple of engineering societies, , similar to ,
Endeavour and Formula Student.
, they also have lots of just social societies.
So when I got involved in was the Climbing Society,
which ran events throughout the entire year.
Yeah.
So just a couple of points of logistics.
, yeah.
So accommodation, you it's mandatory for you to get accommodation
with the university itself.
, it is actually quite expensive.
, so I think I paid around 12 K for
mine.
The higher limit is around 15 K.
, yeah.
Generally these are in what they call apartment style.
So it's, , you would generally be sharing a room
with someone else and you have access to a kitchen
and a shared bathroom.
, so most of these accommodations are quite old and
run down, especially the high rises.
, there are around six people in a room in
a high rise, and, , the facilities are a bit
old.
.
So if you are applying, I recommend doing a research
on which accommodation you want to apply for, because when
applications open, you can generally rank them in terms of
what you want.
You might not get it, but at least it's worth
a shot.
, so dining plan is also, , necessary to apply
for a dining plan.
There is no option to skip out on this, so
dining plans start at about two $2,000.
, I generally recommend going for the least expensive one
and get dining dollars if you can, rather than swipes.
The food at the dining halls is not good
at all.
It's one of the most notorious points about UPenn.
Actually.
Everyone talks about it.
It's how bad the food is.
, yeah, health insurance was around 4000 for my year.
So yeah, yeah.
Be warned that UPenn is quite an expensive university to
go for on exchange.
, yeah.
So visa for me was about £300.
And one thing to note about applying for visas for
UPenn is that to apply for a visa for American
University unique and I-20, you need to apply for it
yourself through the University of Pennsylvania.
They have a portal you have to manually fill in
the form.
Some universities will send this out to you, but UPenn
doesn't, so this can take up to three weeks.
, if they are extremely busy.
So please, , do that early as soon as you
can.
, the other note is for vaccinations.
So UPenn has immunisation immune sorry.
Immunisation requirements.
, what they don't tell you is that you can
get these, , vaccines when you arrive, , as part
of your a really expensive, , health insurance.
So, , yeah.
Don't get them in the UK.
, yeah.
So payments and bank account.
The other other the other thing I want you to
quickly mention is, , so all your fees need to
be paid through wire transfer, which is a bit different
from how it works in the UK.
, I recommend setting up a bank account as soon
as you can, , when you get to Pennsylvania.
So the university has an agreement with PNC, so it's
quite easy for students to set up their bank accounts.
You just need to bring an ID, but the first
payment that you need to pay is quite early on.
I think it might even be before the start of
the semester.
And if you don't have an international, , a US
bank account, you might have to pay, at least for
my year.
You had to pay, , an additional third party fee
that because of the third party, , transfer.
So that can be up to 10%.
So it's quite expensive.
, another thing that they don't tell you is that
there are there's a payment.
Well, no, they do tell you that there's a payment
plan, but they don't tell you that you can afford
to miss one transaction.
, you have a leniency of one so that if
you accidentally forget to pay one of the, , one
of the deadlines, , as long as you pay it
and don't miss another one, , you're generally fine.
, so.
Yeah, that brings us to the end of my slides.
, it's a bit short.
That's great.
You've got, , only a few minutes.
Oh, okay.
So any questions?
Yeah.
, can you work in the summer after your exchange
year on the visa?
You have to get.
.
For me.
No, the visa literally ends as your semester ends.
I've.
Yeah.
Just kick.
You out.
Basically.
Yeah.
I'm sure that if you have a reason to stay,
you can ask around, , and see if you can
extend the visa or something, but I, I didn't obviously
I didn't do it, so I don't I wouldn't know.
Yeah.
Yeah.
But on that topic, I think different American universities have
different arrangements with visas for sort of summer internships and
things that.
Maybe, maybe you'll be able to say something when we
come to you, but, , yeah.
Any other questions?
Is the teaching style or.
Theoretical skills based, math based, or is it more practical
elements?
, I feel it's a good mix of well,
obviously it depends on the course you're taking, but I
feel it's very mix of theoretical and practical with
a heavy emphasis on practical.
all your assignments, , are very much things that
you might end up doing in real life, in my
opinion.
one of the assignments I did was to implement
a web search engine, which is something that I don't
think Edinburgh does, and it's something that really taught me
a lot.
And I got to use some of the skills during
my internship over the summer.
Okay.
, anybody else?
Last question.
I have a question.
Six people in a room.
Do you mean six people in an apartment?
Yeah.
Sorry.
, it depends on the type of accommodation you have.
So in a bigger apartment, it can be six people
in the apartment with two people in a room.
, sorry, I should have clarified.
The.
Youth hostel sort of bunk bed sort of arrangement.
Yeah.
No.
That's great.
Okay.
Thanks very much.
Yeah, thanks.
Okay.
So next talk, , is on ETH Zurich.
And let me just get the slides up.
, and, Ross, , let me find this.
Come on.
You have any preference?
Okay, sure.
I'm missing something.
Oh, no, I don't have yours.
I don't have your slides.
, it's just called.
Oh, sorry.
There it is.
Yeah, sorry.
I do have them.
Oh, there we go.
Okay.
And the microphone is here.
Okay.
Yeah.
So just.
.
So.
Hi.
My name is, .
, I was one of the two students to exchange
to eat in Zurich last year.
Yeah.
And I'm Ross.
I was also there.
I studied CSS and maths, so I did a joint
degree as well.
So for the most part, these slides have a lot
of information that we're not necessarily going to explain right
now.
Therefore your benefit when you look at them on the
website.
, because there's no point getting into details here.
, so Zurich, it's the largest city in Switzerland with
incredible public transport links both within Switzerland and around it.
European trains are great guys.
, it's in a German part of Switzerland, but you
do not need to know German to get by.
I did just fine.
And you slowly pick up Swiss German anyways.
It has a very high cost of living, as I'm
sure most people are aware, but the quality of life
is relatively high simultaneously, and pretty much every big company
you can think of has an office of some kind
there.
So especially if you're a European and you wouldn't need
a work permit.
Internships are very much on the table.
With with the move to Switzerland, housing is provided by
the university.
It's on a first come, first serve basis.
But I think both of us applied two hours
after the form came out and we were guaranteed accommodation
at that point.
, it was cheap.
It was about the same price as my accommodation in
Edinburgh.
And that's because the Swiss government highly subsidises this accommodation
for exchange students.
So please make sure if you get into it, you
fill out this form the second it comes out.
for immigration If you're European or from the UK,
you do not need any form of visa or anything
to go to Zurich.
If you are international, it was a fairly simple process
in the grand scheme of things.
You just fill out a form, send it to them
and I got my visa and 5 to 6
weeks here.
If you get an accommodation that's in the city of
Zurich.
We were lucky we didn't.
But if you do get one in the city, you
have to have proof that you have 21,000 in your
bank account before you actually can go.
So we got very lucky that we weren't in the
city of Zurich, but you do actually have to pay
for the long commute and everything, but yeah.
, this is again important disclaimer.
Switzerland is expensive.
They are not kidding about that.
Personally, I wasn't someone who used to cook a lot
while I lived in Edinburgh for the first two years.
I got very good at cooking over the year because
you kind of just have to.
I don't think we had any takeaway unless it was
for celebrations of some form or if someone else was
paying for it, and the university does have really good
mentors or cafeterias that do pretty affordable food with a
variety of options.
This is one of 11 options just at the central
campus, and if you commute between the two campuses, there
are 25 to 30 restaurants you can get food
at.
And there's vegetarian, vegan, everything.
, so university itself is one of the Swiss federal
institutes alongside EPFL, which you'll hear about soon.
One of the biggest research units in the in Europe
and the world consistently ranked in the top five, I
think their third this year for CSE, but don't quote
me on that.
And some of the famous alumni include names that you're
probably familiar with, especially if you do maths.
There's a lot more if I included mathematicians.
, so for the most part, the undergrad is taught
in German, so you're locked into essentially taking courses in
the third year of the bachelors.
So it's all of these which are kind of similar
to some of the courses you'd expect to take in
Edinburgh in third year, but in some cases more rigorous
or require some background reading before you go there.
Personally, I spent the summer before I moved on.
Picking up on the background that I knew I didn't
have from certain, especially from the mathematical aspects of stuff.
But these aren't the only courses you can take.
This slide, while it might not be readable at the
back, was just me trying to show you, regardless of
what field of CSS you are interested in, there's at
least five courses for you to take, and I pretty
much every course I took was on the master's list.
So as long as you're willing to take willing to
do some extra work in the first couple of weeks
of the semester, you'll be more than fine to take
masters courses.
And I did better on the master's courses than I
did.
The undergrad courses taste .
That can mean whatever you need.
, so the credit requirements, you need to do a
maximum of 30 credits and a minimum of 20.
As far as I'm aware, that hasn't changed.
And these are requirements from both ETH and Edinburgh.
And the requirements are that you have to make sure
at least two thirds of these credits are from one
of the degrees listed here.
, electrical engineering there is very interdisciplinary, and for the
most part it was a computer science degree, just on
a low level computer architecture, computer systems perspective.
And you are locked out of.
I did the calculations on this yesterday in nine courses
in the entire CSE department, which is a very low
amount compared to some of the other universities you could
exchange to.
There is no priority selection.
We got access to the form at the same time
as everyone else did.
It is first come, first serve in the truest sense.
Yeah, I'll talk about joint degrees as well on this
slide.
I guess if you're just in computer science, it's fine.
As we've just said, most everything is in English, but
the math side of things for me was quite hard.
I had to do pre-reading and things, and the courses
I actually took were what did I take?
, algebra and complex analysis.
But but yeah, for both I had to do pre-reading.
So I guess you'd have to look into the actual
courses you're going to take for that.
Really.
And just to quickly add on to that, these are
my slides from last year.
I neither had time last year nor this year to
update it.
I have looked into CSS and physics now.
If you do that, you are fine.
But the same caveat will apply that you're going to
have to do some masters courses, which is harder when
you're in maths or physics compared to just going into
a CSS Masters course.
, other important information 14 week long semesters compared to
what you're used to here.
Your exams for fall semester are in January.
Your exams for second semester are in August.
This means that you have two months to study for
your exams, but your summer still requires you to study.
Personally, I was working over the summer and I flew
back in August for the one exam I had that
Ross also did.
, but it's fine for the most part, at least
from my experience.
, and oral examinations are common for especially for the
theoretical and maths courses.
It's not necessary.
You'll have written exams and a lot of the masters
courses will do 60 to 70% projects.
I guess all.
Exams usually get better grades to be honest than written
exams.
So it's nothing to be scared of.
Yeah.
, one last thing.
Grading system is different.
You're graded on a six point scale.
, a four is a pass, a six is excellent.
A six is achievable without getting 100 on a course.
Something very important I am pretty sure I have
a 5.75 on a course by only getting
a 60% in the final, because that's just how the
course was curved.
So your grades on the exams are curved up to
match this grade system.
So the 4 to 6, while it seems only
two grade points are passing, it is actually a much
larger percentage of your actual exam.
And I think this is one of the last things
I talked about.
So student associations work very similarly.
Was it is equivalent to USA, the umbrella student union
that has every society in it.
And this would be the closest thing to this would
be comes up here.
, they run a lot of events.
I think we at least personally I travelled a lot
and we went to Lausanne a couple of times just
based off of them paying for events for us to
travel.
I got a flight to Turin out of just the
student societies.
So please do join.
They have sub societies with essentially sigs basically for
everything you can think of similar to Edinburgh.
So do engage with them.
There's also the Erasmus Student network that does events for
internationals and exchange students.
, and yeah, that's it.
We wanted to leave some time for questions, so I
rushed through things.
Otherwise.
Feel free to reach out to me and if I
can't answer your question, I will also just cross in
the emails and we can figure it out.
Thank you.
Thanks.
Thanks.
.
Questions?
Anybody?
Yes.
What were your grades ?
.
Qualifying for or or for.
The first year?
Okay, so these won't be representative of grades for this
year or last year.
We went through first year in Covid, but I had
high 90s on most courses.
I'm sure Don can probably comment on what it's
with the non-COVID stuff.
I can say that youth is, , one of our
most competitive, , destinations.
, but we have three places now.
I mean, last year we had two.
Now we have three.
, so I should say, .
Please apply.
I mean, , most people are successful.
Okay?
You may not get the place that at the at
your top choice, but it's quite likely you get an
offer for something that that will turn.
Out to be good.
Also, I completely forgot to add one thing that was
very important because I hadn't actually done research at the
point these slides were made last year.
But in my second semester I did a 16 week
long research project along with , I was supervised by
two professors and a PhD student, and it, as a
research focussed university, allows you to do this very easily.
There's an entirely separate process for exchange students to undertake
research over the semester.
, you get a grade for it, you get mentorship,
and it's also an incredible experience.
If you're interested in academia or CSE, research in, again,
any field possible within the umbrella of CSE.
Others.
So maybe you could comment on the funding and what
you know, what sort of proportion of your costs that
covered.
Yeah.
So we both got access to the scholarship, , the
yes, and the Swiss Exchange mobility program.
And that gave us a yeah.
No, 1900.
It was more than that, I don't know.
It was it was 19.
It was 1900 francs a semester, which helped basically with
both rent and lunch in my case.
And the funny part about this is they pay out
the scholarship in cash.
So you're going to have to figure out how to
get that cash into your bank account if you don't
make a Swiss account, which I personally didn't.
But otherwise you have that avenue available to you.
, beyond that, I would say my costs for Zurich
were maybe 1.31.4 x compared to Edinburgh, but I know
I was spending more money in Edinburgh than I should
have been.
So again, grain of salt?
, yes.
I was wondering what it's , obviously, since.
, so that so that really depends on the courses
you take.
, there is definitely a selection of courses where you
can do you can have a much easier time.
, but for the most part I would take.
So I'm particular personally, I'm very interested in systems and
security, which something is not for around the world.
So I was taking some particularly intense courses just because
I didn't know if I would have the chance to
do them again.
So if that's your right, I would say working more
than Edinburgh by a fair amount.
But I think I know Ross was especially good at
this and I tried when I could.
It is very possible for you to work over the
week and have your weekends free to actually do fun
stuff, so it's again a matter of how you do
work life balance, but it is definitely doable to have
a fun time while taking , academically rigorous courses.
Yes.
What's the class size or teaching style?
Oh, that's that's a very good question.
So your third year bachelor's courses will have up to
150 or so students in them, so they'll be fairly
massive.
, I took a master's class with 11 students where
it was literally every lecture was a tutorial.
, but most masters courses I saw were roughly 60
people max.
, so the master's classes, your bandwidth may vary, but
for the third year undergrad especially, that's that's pretty much
they have to pass seven out of the eight courses
I listed.
So there's a lot of undergrads on those courses.
And teaching style, , lecturing style is kind of different.
You'll get used to longer form lectures, , with a
less, less focus on the material and the lecture itself.
And then you do a lot of reading and catching
up after the lecture to actually pass what was explained
in the lecture.
And, , another important thing is, , they are very
traditional in the sense that not every lecture is recorded.
So going to lectures is a priority.
And that's something I had to get used to because
I personally did not do that very well in second
year.
But you guys should please go to lectures.
, but but.
Yeah, if if there's more specific questions, feel free to
send me an email, because I know learning styles vary
and I'm happy to talk about it in depth.
Okay.
Thank you.
That's great.
So our next, , talk is, .
Yeah.
You brought your laptop.
Good.
, .
Or did you, , but you can plug.
Sorry.
Not very long.
Ago, but you should have gone.
Okay, well, maybe.
Maybe I could try to.
It's maybe simple if we don't switch the laptops.
Okay, so this is Pierre and Nick and from.
And they went to, , ETH.
.
, sorry.
They went to EPFL.
, sorry.
Excuse me.
, .
, so ignore all of the secret stuff that, ,
you just saw.
, yeah.
Well, that might be.
Well.
Could you.
Is it possible to click the link instead?
I think that was the, .
Just a second.
.
, okay.
My my laptop's got too much stuff on it.
Oh, there we go.
, wait a minute.
Give me a second.
Okay.
Oh, there's a link.
Click a link, and then it should open up Google
Slides and you can click slideshow.
, you click stop there.
Anyway, here's the here's the microphone.
I love it.
Okay.
Hello.
Hello, lovely.
So hello everyone.
My name is Pierre.
, my name is Nick N.
And I study CSS and maths.
Nick studies just CSS.
We went to EPFL.
You're going to hear us repeating a couple of things
because it's in many ways quite similar to ETH.
So in terms of the map of Switzerland, Lausanne is
highlighted in red there.
That's where EPFL is, Zurich.
You can see further away towards the north and that's
where ETH is.
Lausanne notably, is in the French speaking part of Switzerland,
whereas Zurich is in the German speaking part of Switzerland.
This is a bit what the campus looks .
You're right on the lake.
You have a lovely view of the mountains.
It was one of my favourite things was getting up
from the accommodation every day, walking over a little hill
and I could see that most days now it's not
always that sunny, but it was that sunny quite often
actually.
And that's me working with my laptop from the bandstand
that you can see with the same view, which was
was gorgeous.
Yeah.
So, , now you covered the question of do you
need to speak French?
So I am not a French speaking, which is why
I'm taking the slide, but I don't think you need
to, , over there.
, you can get around most places while just speaking
English.
, and if you're buying stuff, usually can use Google
Translate.
There's not too much difficulty if you're not French speaking.
, but I do encourage you, if you want to,
to take, , the French courses they offer, because it's
nice to learn about the culture there.
And I think for the A1 courses, for those who
don't speak French and are starting from below, , they
do teach a lot about Swiss culture as well.
And I learned a bit from there.
, so yeah, you don't need to speak French.
There's a lot of courses from English that's taught in
English.
, and yeah, most of the exchange students don't speak
French either, , I think.
Yeah.
And the masters students there as well, , most of
them converse in English, so.
Yeah, that's.
Okay.
Yeah.
Now, , so one of the reasons why we, I
think both decided to choose EPFL is because of the
world rankings.
It's pretty well rated in the world.
And I think teaching quality wise as well, being a
student there, it was definitely a really high standard of
teaching.
I think I had a professor who was answering
Piazza equivalent questions at 12 a.m. and giving really detailed
answers.
So they do really care a lot about their students.
.
And.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Here.
Here as well.
Here.
Yeah.
, and that's just a, a photo and a screenshot
of, , the master's courses that you could take in
EPFL.
A very small portion.
There's quite a lot that you can take there.
And notably, the master's courses are in English.
They're all taught in English, I think.
And a lot of the bachelor level courses as well
in CSS are taught in English as well.
, though some of the first and second year ones
are taught in French, but most of the third year
ones are taught in English.
So yeah.
So this is my course selection.
I do maths and CSS, so I have a bit
of a mix there.
I also had a little French course despite being half
French, I took a sort of slightly higher level and
and a little tiny music course, which is great fun.
So a little bit of potential to mix some things
in, but quite a lot of sort of machine learning
heavy stuff because going on exchange, you have the opportunity
to sort of make what you will of your, of
your courses, that some stuff that might not be offered
or that you would have to wait to be able
to take, say, in the Masters or in fourth year
at Edinburgh.
So I took a bunch these all of these CSS
courses are master's courses.
And then the bachelors was a mix of masters and
and and bachelors.
Yeah.
And these are the courses I took, I mostly took
fundamental courses that I thought, , since I want
to be a software engineer, a software engineer should
know about.
So this is kind of the courses I took.
It's mostly software related, , construction courses.
, there is one course that I would recommend if
you are, , if you , , building apps and
etc. it's the software enterprise.
I think I learned a lot from there.
, and yeah, other than that, there's a mixture of
bachelor and master level courses and just shortage as
well.
I think I got better grades than the Masters one
for some reason.
, but yeah, sometimes the bachelors ones, I think they
drill you a lot in the concepts, so it's very
assignment heavy.
Whereas some of the master's courses, , aren't as assignment
heavy and at least in my, , experience.
So.
Yeah, they're.
Yeah.
And , life outside of university.
So, , most of the life I had and fun
I had outside of university were correlated to this society.
It's called the ESN, , Exchange Student Network.
It's very Erasmus student network.
.
It's great.
I feel you should definitely join a lot of
the events from here if you go, because, , everyone
sort of has the same mindset of kind of making
the most off exchange.
People are very open to meet each other.
I think it's one of the most beautiful parts of
exchange.
people are always making friends.
, it's always a good time.
People are open to doing activities and making the most
of it and travelling as well.
So do join this.
I think I made a lot of really great friends
just from the society alone.
Yeah.
And.
Yeah, this is just, , the schedule of the welcome
week.
So they have a welcome week as well.
And EPFL, , and.
Yeah.
Sorry.
Yeah.
This is an ESN welcome week.
So it's just for the exchange students, , exchange students
and masters students join it.
, and.
Yeah, you can take I think you can buy the
welcome pack where you can take all of these events,
and it's sort of very intensive.
, few days where you get to do a lot
of events and explore Switzerland a bit as well.
Yeah, these are more of the events.
, I think notably the events I had the most
fun and were the ski weekend events.
I think you should join those if you decide to
go.
, and.
Yeah, that's.
So these are couple photos.
That's me and Pierre up there.
, and and.
Yeah, that's a photo of the, , Swiss Alps with,
, EPFL campus.
It's very beautiful.
The views, , I think just five minutes ahead of
the campus, you can see, , the view of the
lake as well as the Alps.
It's very, very beautiful in the morning and at night.
, and.
Yeah, it's and also you can there there's, there's public
transport, but you can also get a bike pass.
I got a bike pass which was 50 francs for
six months or for a year, and you could use
it for the whole, you could use bikes for the
whole year and you can rent them.
So, yeah, these are a couple more photos, , from
the experience.
Yeah.
So in terms of clubs outside of university, there's a
whole massive list.
This is just A to C in the alphabetic order.
So yeah, there's pretty much anything you can think of.
And in terms of sports, they have a fair few
as well.
So you won't run out.
, I personally what did I do?
I did more ultimate Frisbee that I did at Edinburgh,
I did salsa with Nick.
We both went with a few a few people, which
is great fun.
, and I did a little bit of academic stuff,
but probably less than Shoreditch told you about.
, so yeah, you won't run out of stuff to
do, that's for sure.
I personally did a lot of hiking.
I did quite a bit by myself, but also with
the extension network and quite a lot of skiing.
I went ski touring for the first time.
That was there where you go up and down, which
was great fun.
And after my exams finished in June, they're not quite
as late as in ETH, they're in June or August,
which is nice, although it's still much later than Edinburgh.
, I did I went hiking for nearly
two weeks straight before I needed to start working on
my internship, which I really, really enjoyed.
So accommodation wise, these are the two places that me
and Next stage we were probably in some of the
best accommodation that they have on offer.
It's arranged for you.
There's a company that's associated with the university.
I stayed in this big circle called the Vortex, which
was built in 2020.
It's über modern.
It was lovely.
Next stayed in this place called the atrium, which is
also super modern.
, and they were both right next to campus and
, yeah, really nice places to be.
So other things to know that Switzerland.
Yes.
It's expensive.
It has a bit of a rep for it.
But actually as a student, we found that there are
ways to make things a lot cheaper than would be
if you went on holiday, for example.
For example, you can buy this transport card that gives
you half price on basically all the transport all year.
Or there are these friends passes that you pay a
fair amount, but not too much, and you can go
anywhere for the whole day with four people.
Also, ESL events that we talked about, there's three
every single week, and they're all as cheap as you
could ask for it to be, basically.
And she talks about, there's the scholarship, the Swiss
European Mobility program, something that.
And that gives you three and a half K.
So that's pretty nice.
And accommodations arranged for you, which is roughly the same
price as in Edinburgh depending on where you go.
Some places can be even slightly cheaper.
And we really enjoyed the campus.
We thought that all of that was brilliant.
So here's a bunch of links if you want to
note them down.
Some more stuff you can look into, but we'll hand
it over to questions if there are any questions.
Yeah.
Sorry.
How much was there?
, I paid 700.
We both paid 130 francs.
So that's £680 a month.
, that includes utilities of all sorts, but I think
the cheapest one by this company, you could get it
for , £500 a month, which was.
Yeah.
Not too bad compared to the centre of Edinburgh.
What's the class size?
And also, can you take undergrad English courses.
Yeah you can take bachelors English courses.
You can take anything in the bachelors or masters.
So long as Don lets you basically.
And as long as the, , there's an exchange coordinator
at EPFL that you need to run everything through as
well.
But he mostly just says yes.
So he's very nice.
You'll meet him if you go.
Class sizes just depends on the class.
I had one with 20 people and then a bachelor's
course with , yeah, I don't know, 100 and something
people.
, it completely depends on the class.
.
Was there anything else you asked there?
Other questions?
Okay.
We were comprehensive enough.
Were we?
Yeah.
Thank you.
Thanks.
So, , that brings us to our last, , presentation.
If I can find it, , from, , Ishan, who
went to Caltech.
.
A second.
Last year.
Now, Caltech, I'll just mention, I think this is one
of the, , one of the more desirable, , exchanges
on the university wide, , program.
, right.
, but we do we do seem to get 1
or 2 places each year for informatics.
Hello.
All right.
, I'm going to keep this fairly short, considering that
people are tired by now, because so am I.
So, .
Yeah.
So our mission, , first year student now went to
Caltech last year, and I will talk to you more
about it.
So I'll focus on why Caltech first.
, it's extremely research focus, which is why it's my
very first point on there.
, it has departments in areas of robotics optimisation, mathematical
optimisation, that is quantum theoretical, computer science, machine learning and
many more.
I've attached to link there for all the centres that
there are.
, feel free to have a look.
, the other thing I would to mention is
that you can do research during term.
In fact, it's encouraged for you to do so.
, you can reach out to professors in any of
those departments or others and go, , I'm interested in
such and such.
, and then they will probably, , meet up with
you and you can talk to them.
, there is also, , for over the summer, there
is a program called surf, , the summer Undergraduate Research
Fellowship.
, on the topic of what to do post your,
, exchange, you have an option to stay at Caltech
and do, , a summer research internship with them.
, and for visa extension reasons, that is the only
reason for which Caltech at least would extend your visa.
, so company internships do not get, .
Well, you won't have help from Caltech.
Let's just say that, , I tried, , one of
the reasons why I picked Caltech personally was mathematical rigour.
, I'm more interested in the math side of computer
science.
And if you are a CS plus math student, you
probably will be too.
, fair note, I am not a Club Med student.
I'm just.
Yes.
So if I can handle the math, So can you
all.
, the Caltech is really small, and I cannot emphasise
enough how small it is.
It has roughly 2000 something total students across undergraduate, post-grad,
everything.
, I know people just before me, and, , well,
I think almost everyone before me was , oh, large
class sizes.
I know there will be a question on that at
some point.
My class sizes were about 20 to 30 max for
everything, and that's a heavy course when it reaches
30.
So super small class sizes.
And the benefit of that is of course, you get
more personal attention.
You can ask more questions.
, you feel less bad about holding of the class
time because everyone knows everyone, which also means that the
professor knows you.
So if you did badly, they will know and ask
you more questions.
, so watch out for that.
, another big part about Caltech is its honour code
system.
, it says as a written there, , the reason
why I bring this up is it's super integral to
sort of the community there and almost , I think
during their freshers week, they have an entire lecture dedicated
to just the honour code, because it is that important.
And one of the best things that comes from this
is not just, you know, everyone is nice to you
and all that.
It's also that they're nice to you outside of classes
or in general on campus or around.
It's sort of , , well, it creates this really,
, nice and helpful environment for, well, you to be
able to sort of feel confident enough to speak to
anyone, , and not be afraid of, , I don't
know, them stealing your ideas and such because that's, ,
apparently there have been stories from Caltech where that has
happened, and they had to bring this up at some
point, and they sort of almost hammer it into you
so that that never happens.
So it's it's super nice that that is the case.
, another big reason to go to Caltech is that
there are many conferences that are either held there or
somewhere in California.
, a lot of the ones are just at least
the ones that I went to were just at Caltech.
So around any of those topics up there, and if
one of them is not there, probably somewhere, , near,
, California or in California or other.
So that's a good reason.
, if you're interested in aerospace, , if you didn't
know, , Caltech sort of doesn't own, , the Jet
Propulsion Lab, but manages it on behalf of NASA.
So if you're interested in that type of stuff, ,
unless you're American, you can't really go in the Jet
Propulsion Lab for legal reasons, but you can sort of
meet the folk there and sort of talk to them
and go , oh, you know, I'm interested in maybe
you'll get something out of that.
, the other last point that I really want to
mention, especially because the weather today was not so nice,
California is super sunny.
, it is really, really nice weather.
It's on all year round, which means you get to
travel a bunch.
Hikes and such are something that I was super into,
and I did a lot of that.
And also just climbing outdoors if you're into that sort
of stuff.
So travelling is just super pleasant.
, let me move on from that.
, logistics.
, most of this, you can sort of have a
look and read the slides will be uploaded, as Don
said.
, the important thing to look at here is I
remember there was some question about a English certificate and
such.
, Caltech does have a requirement that you have some,
, you might need to take an English test.
So there is.
Okay, let me just put it this way.
If you're a local student here or from a majority
English speaking country, you probably do not need to.
I'm an international student and I need it to.
So please, , sort of Google these things and or
when you do apply, you'll get emails about them.
So you will figure out if you need to or
not.
But it is not difficult because they allow allowed Duolingo
English tests as a way of proving your level of
English, and it's really easy.
, you also have vaccination requirements and such.
And for visa, I applied in June.
, but it's essentially whenever you receive this form called
the I-20 from Caltech, and they usually send it about
sometime in May.
So essentially as soon as you receive the form, apply
for a visa and you'll be fine.
All the costs and stuff are from my ear, so
expect that to be a bit higher now.
So it is on a much more expensive side of
things, although you're still paying much less than you would
if you were studying there.
Because if you were there, it's about, at least in
my area was about 65 K, the tuition fee USD.
, yeah.
, accommodation is guaranteed.
You do not need to worry about it whatsoever.
, it will most likely be back to the residents,
, me included, and everyone before me has been allocated
there.
I spoke to the exchange coordinator on Caltech side.
Apparently, that's just what they do.
So you can Google this.
You can look at pictures.
Apologies for not putting them up here, but you can
find them pretty easily.
, I'm going to focus a little bit on just
giving advice.
, and I want to upfront just tell you guys
it is a very math heavy university.
, so please be comfortable with sort of professors almost
at any given moment going , okay, here is something
that I'm explaining informally.
IRA 124 I'm just going to write out the proof
and that happens a lot.
It's really nice.
, because they do go through it and sort of
obviously take questions and such.
But please be comfortable with that idea, particularly linear algebra.
At least a lot of the courses that I took
involved that most CSE courses there do in some form
or the other.
, mostly also because currently their biggest research focus is
machine learning.
And guess what the math behind that involves, right?
, so please do not sleep on any of your
math courses, regardless of whether or not you go or
go to Caltech or not.
Please, , look up courses early.
, you don't have to worry about signups too much
because you can only sign up once you're actually there.
Physically.
You have to go to the registrar physically for your
first term and tell them what courses you want.
So just have an idea.
But a subtle point there is please account for your
interests changing between the time you apply to when you're
actually there.
Have sort of backup courses in case you're , oh,
I was interested in this, but maybe by the time
you're actually there, you're , I this other thing,
and this university doesn't offer these courses, what will you
do?
So please just have sort of backups.
And this is just general to any exchange.
, a workload a lot, a lot more, , work
coursework, , be prepared for spending your entire day in
front of a whiteboard and writing stuff out and trying
to, you know, figure out stuff because it it it
do be that.
But in my opinion, it's not that the content itself
is so much more difficult.
There is just a lot more work for you to
do.
, everything will be explained really well.
You have office hours you can go to, which are
essentially sort of these dropping labs that you can
just ask questions and they're super helpful.
, you can obviously email the Tas, the professor, ,
talk to their students is in fact, is encouraged for
you to speak to other students in almost every course
and sort of draft stuff out on the whiteboard
and such, as long as you don't copy each other's
work.
So collaboration is a big part and well, yeah, it's
super.
It's a is a huge part of just Caltech.
, and yeah, this is also validated by some PhD
students that I met.
, and the last point, yeah, that you won't really
get treated, , differently as an exchange student.
In fact, I don't even think , maybe after a
week or so of me being their officer of the
introductions and such.
, people forget that you're an exchange student almost immediately,
and they sort of you just kind of are a
Caltech student from that point on, which means that the
assumptions made about a Caltech student in the sense of
how they know these things, , they must have done
these courses.
They must have seen this or not kind of applies
to you.
Now, , so please go talk to people in your
first week and make friends, because it will help a
lot with this.
, another thing that I want to quickly mention is,
unlike most other universities, Caltech works on a timely basis
as opposed to semester early.
So there's three terms, , and you'll roughly be taking
4 to 6 courses, depending on sort of the, the
credits that the IT course is allocated per term.
So I did roughly 13 courses in total while I
was there.
, and you can also, , as I said before,
when I said you can do research, you can also
turn that into a course for you to do so
you can get graded on it.
It just helps out, , a little bit with that.
So as I said, my, , slides were not very
many.
So I'm going to, , well, here's some pictures from
my time there.
, to prove that I wasn't just in my room
the whole time, I did go out.
And I did see things as you guys.
You guys should, too.
, but anyway, if there's any questions, please do ask.
Questions?
Yes.
There are things that folks, .
For which every person has worked for me.
, they're not necessarily different, but I see what you're
trying to say.
, so.
Right.
So the question was what?
Caltech.
What kind of things?
Caltech focuses more on CSI.
, there is, well, heavy overlap between the two.
, the I will say this, the machine learning sort
of, , research department is one of the largest and
very unsurprisingly.
, one of the professors there, , was head of
research at Nvidia and left that position very recently.
And you can I had her as one of my
professors for the machine learning course over there.
So the standard of that is, you know, , pretty
high.
But, , it's it's not so much that that's the
only thing to focus on, though.
There is plenty of other, , sort of research areas,
as I showed before.
, robotics is another huge one there.
, electrical engineering department is one of the biggest departments
there.
So, yeah, if you're interested in that sort of stuff,
, you have plenty of other opportunities other than just
I.
Love the questions.
Sure.
Yeah.
Of course.
Just do your research.
Yes.
, as I said before, you can do research during
term, , if you want.
You just got to reach out, essentially.
, it's quite nice, .
I reached out to one of the professors, ,
during my second term there and sort of just had,
, a coffee with them, spoke with them.
They were , you know what?
Let's just do something together.
, you don't even need to have something concrete in
mind, as long as you're just able to prove that
you are one good enough and two passionate enough to
do it.
, and for the summer, if you wish, you can
apply for SAF, which is the summer research program.
, if you get in, they will extend your visa
for you to stay over summer.
And you can do that with a group or a
professor, whichever one you apply with.
Yeah.
Anybody else?
All right.
Okay.
Cool.
Thanks.
Cool.
I'll just to say one more thing, though, before
anyone starts clapping.
, I just want to shout out Donovan Ella here
for arranging all of this, managing all of this, helping
each one of our well, one of my fellow exchange
students out this entire time.
So please give him a round of applause, , for
doing all of this.
, and now I can take my leave.
Yeah, thanks.
That's very kind of you.
Yeah, I do my best.
, yeah.
, on on the topic of help when you're on
these exchanges.
Okay, so you do have, , you have your, your
your student advisor back in Edinburgh.
You also have me for for academic help.
, the sway team.
I don't know what your experiences were, the people who
were on exchange, but they they guide you through this
process.
So you get allocated a place, and then there's a
whole bunch of things you have to do.
And they've been mentioned here, you know, as a visa
applications and all this stuff.
And I, I don't even see any of the many
emails that they're sending.
But I think that they're basically prompting you at every
stage of the way, you know, what you have to
do and so forth.
So, , you know, you don't have to guess about
these things.
, you'll, you'll be told, okay, so thanks for showing
up and, you know, apply and, , you know, ,
have a good time if you go on exchange.
Okay.
I think it's a great opportunity.