Oh.
Do you want me to speak now?
Yeah.
Go ahead.
All right.
Yeah.
Hi, everyone.
, sorry to interrupt.
I just want to take a quick minute of your
time to tell you about a really exciting opportunity that
we have, which is to climb Kilimanjaro.
We're putting together a huge team from Edinburgh.
We've actually got quite a lot of people on board
already, but it will be great to have even more.
, I took part in this challenge last year and
it was actually the best thing I've ever done.
I could not recommend it any more.
, but it's a charity challenge.
So you fundraise in order to come on the climb.
Half the half of the money you raise covers your
climb costs, and half of the money goes towards Dig
Deep.
Dig deep are a small charity based in the south
west of Kenya.
They help to provide clean water, safe toilets and hygiene
education.
And in that area of the world, two out of
three people don't currently have access to clean water.
So really, really important cause.
But even more exciting opportunity for you on the climb
itself.
You go through four different ecosystems on your way to
the snow capped summit, which is also the tallest freestanding
mountain in the world.
And then after the climb, you have the opportunity to
see a bit more of Tanzania by going on safari.
Or you can go to Zanzibar to just relax after
all of your hard work.
If you would to find out any more information,
you can scan the QR code on the screen behind
me.
And we're also hosting an information session tonight in 50
George Square Room Geo two.
It's going to be at 6 p.m..
We're going through all the details about the climb, the
charity, the fundraising and how we can support you with
your fundraising as well.
You also get a £100 discount by attending the session.
So if it is something you're interested in or you
know anyone who might be, please do come along at
6 p.m. to go to in 50 George Square.
Thanks very much.
Thank you.
Okay.
Right.
Let's get this organised.
Ah, yesterday.
It didn't work on both screens.
Today it does.
She fixed something.
Yay!
Oh, okay.
Good afternoon, I'm Phillip Wadler.
I'm lecturing in place of dawn this week.
, it's great to be back here.
I used to, , I created this course, actually, so
it's great to be able to teach it again.
So before I start, some of you were here yesterday
and heard me explain how important questions are.
Are there any questions?
And just so I can check, it looks there
are more people here today.
How many people saw in yesterday's lecture and how many
people didn't see yesterday's lecture?
Okay, just a few of you.
So if you didn't see it, you'll be a little
bit confused.
And then you'll go, oh well, I can't ask a
question because I'm a little bit confused and I didn't
see it yesterday.
Just go ahead and ask questions, okay.
Right.
So we're talking about monads.
And yesterday we were talking about IO and monads.
So IO stands for input output.
And we learned how a monad lets you describe.
Right.
So put char you give it a character and it
returns a command something that's written io of unit type.
So right open closed parenthesis drunk.
It's just the unit type.
In Haskell it has only one value which is also
written open close parenthesis.
So it's quite useful to have sort of ,
trivial types that in particular here instead of having
to make up a separate command, IO in general returns
a value the way we you can say we're not
interested in the value we returned by saying is it's
always of this type.
This type only has one value.
Nothing to see here.
No interesting information.
By the way, does anybody know what this unit type,
the type of no interesting information is called in the
C programming language.
Has anybody programmed in C?
Yes, some of you.
I was afraid of that.
Yes.
Some of you have been exposed to C.
And what is the unit type called in C when
you have a procedure that returns nothing of interest, what's
its type.
Void.
Right.
Except void sounds empty whereas unit sounds one.
In fact, this is the type with one value in
it.
It's the unit type.
, the empty type is a different type.
It has no values in it whatsoever.
And if you go on to fourth year and take
my class on Agda, you'll learn just how important the
empty type is, but that's a different type.
So C unfortunately makes things a bit confusing by calling
the unit type the void type.
It's not type with nothing in it, it's a type
with one thing in it, but that has no interesting
information because it's always the same thing.
Okay, so put char takes a charge and returns a
command.
So this is an IO of unit type.
And if you ever did that command it would print
an exclamation mark.
But the point is this is a pure value.
It stands for something that could, you know, it stands
for.
It's a set of instructions to follow, to do something,
but it doesn't follow the instructions.
It's just a set of instructions to follow.
And then this lets you put together two sets of
instructions to first do the, , the first one and
then do the second one.
So if I say put your question mark, put char
exclamation mark, then that will write out two characters.
Done really does nothing and returns no interesting value.
And then we could write a string.
Right?
So you take a string.
If it's empty, you do nothing.
If it's head and tail xz then first you put
the character x and then recursively we apply put string
again to xz so it ends up printing out the
whole string.
So put string.
Question mark playing is the same as.
Put a question mark, put char exclamation mark and then
do nothing else.
, we could also think of put string as just
folder with sequence and done , composed with map of
put char.
So the important thing is there are some laws that
are satisfied here , m followed by Don is just
em, right?
Do em and then do nothing is just do em.
Do nothing and then do em is just do em,
do em and then do n, and then do o
is just do em and then do n and then
do oh.
So you can put the parentheses either place.
And does anybody remember the name for a system that
has an operator and an identity that satisfy these three
laws?
Monoid.
Correct.
Sorry.
, Boolean algebras have two of these in them, right?
One for conjunction and one for disjunction.
But a Boolean algebra is a much more sophisticated structure.
This is very simple, just one operator and one unit
satisfying these three laws.
And you'll have bumped into these because these are very
important for doing just as here folder.
We often have folder and some boolean operator.
Some binary operator I'm sorry.
And then it's unit.
So that's a very common pattern which is why it's
worth knowing about monoids.
But the other reason it's worth knowing about monoids is
because monad is a pun on monoid.
So I've told you how to put together commands.
How do you actually execute a command?
And the answer is if we bind main.
So main is just another function in Haskell.
But by convention main always has type command.
And by convention when you run a program, whatever is
bound to main, that's what you do.
So I gave an example of this yesterday.
Oh that's not the one I want.
I gave an example of this yesterday.
If we say run GHC.
Well, let's look at the file.
Confused first.
But that just says print out an exclamation mark and
a question mark and an exclamation mark.
And then if I say, okay, run that program.
That's what it does.
It prints the question mark at an exclamation mark.
Didn't even print a new line after it.
It just had this funny prompt.
And the point is that we can then do exceptional
reasoning in languages with side effects , see print!
Ha!
Print!
Ha goes ha ha!
But if you say let x be the value of
print ha in x, followed by x in only, this
does that as a side effect.
This does nothing at all, so you only get one.
Ha!
The laugh is on you.
So.
But in Haskell this does nothing.
It's just a command.
It's a list of instructions.
So saying let em be this list of instructions in
this new list of instructions M followed by m.
That's fine.
That works perfectly well.
So we don't need to worry about let doing something
funny.
It's just a set of instructions.
And then the next trick is instead of always writing
unit, we can write something else.
So I o of char is a command that reads
something from the input.
And returns.
Whatever it was, it read.
So this is a list of commands.
And whenever you execute the command, then it's going to
return a value.
So when we finally execute this command, if the input
is a b, c when we're done it's going to
return the value a.
And after we've done this it's done something.
So the remaining input has changed.
It's now BK we've read the A and B see
what is left to read.
Return does nothing except return the value that you give
it.
So return of empty list could have type I o
of string.
So in this case it's returning the empty string.
And if the input was BK it would yield the
value empty string.
And the input doesn't change it just b c.
So it does nothing except return a value.
And now we can combine commands.
So we first we do this command.
It does some stuff and it returns a value.
What are we going to do with that value.
We are going to pass it into another function.
This is a separate function.
It takes an argument of type A.
So we'll give it that one.
And then it does some stuff and returns the value
of type B.
And this final thing.
So what does this do.
So it returns the value this one returned.
But what does it do.
It does everything this one does and everything this one
does.
So it's combining two things.
So it's very similar to the operator we saw before.
But now it's threading a value through.
So for example if we say get char and then
apply this function lambda x put char to upper of
x so it gets the character a x gets bound
to a to upper of little a is big A,
and that writes a big A.
So when the input is a, b, c it produces
the output a and the remaining input is BC.
So in general right if m has type AOA and
k.
So this is actually a standard technique K stands for
continuation.
And quite often you write programs in what's called continuation
passing style where you have a function that says this
is what you do afterwards.
So k takes an a doesn't I of b, then
m followed by k will be an I o of
b.
And again this is just a recipe.
And what does it do if you ever do it.
It performs the command m.
But that will yield a value of type A which
we'll call x.
And then it'll perform.
It'll Ill apply k to x that yield something of
type I of b.
So that's some instructions.
So it will do whatever the instructions say and return
a value y of type b.
And then when we're done we just return the final
value y.
So here's a program get line which says okay read
a character.
Put that in X.
If it's new line, stop, just return the empty string.
Otherwise recursively read the rest of the line again.
You'll stop whenever you finally see a new line.
Call that x as and return x cons xs.
So if the input was a b, c new line
def, it'll return the first line, the string a, b,
c, and the remaining input.
It'll eat up the new lines.
The remaining input will be d e f.
Okay.
Any questions about that?
Especially from people who didn't see the slower Presentation yesterday.
People who didn't see the slower presentation can nod ,
okay, I follow that.
Anybody nodding okay.
So notice that right?
Return and bind are related to the things we
saw before down in sequence.
Done is just return of again this unit type.
The thing that C calls void and sequence which just
combines two commands, is just m bind a function that
just ignores its argument.
Its argument is bound to be the value of this
type, and then goes off and does n.
So m followed by n can just be written as
a bind in this way, where you ignore the bound
value because it's always going to be of the unit
type.
So not very interesting.
Though as I described, the unit type is not very
interesting, but this is one of the interesting things that
I hope you'll learn from seeing all this, which is
that not very interesting types are very useful, but the
unit type lets us deal just with IE of an
arbitrary type.
We don't need to build make up something separate to
mean a command that doesn't return a value.
We can just have I o of unit as saying,
oh, this is a command and don't worry about the
value it returns.
It'll always be the same thing.
And the type the unit type.
Let's use the types to say whatever it returns.
We know what it is.
It will be the one value of the unit type.
So now we have this echo program which does get
line binds that to a line.
This is very similar to the hand we just saw.
If the line is empty then we'll stop and we'll
return the unit type.
So this thing eventually returns the unit type And otherwise
we will map to upper over the line.
So put the whole line in uppercase and then we
will print it out with a new line at the
end.
So we read a line.
Read the new line at the end.
Print the line.
Convert the line to uppercase.
Print the line.
Print a new line at the end.
And again I'll just show an example of this.
Oops.
Okay.
And now if I just hit New line, what's going
to happen.
Come on.
If I just hit new lines, what's going to happen?
The computer will explode.
Yes.
No.
We'll vote.
How many people think the computer will explode?
Three.
Okay.
How many people think the program will just terminate quietly?
Ah, it didn't explode.
How boring.
Okay, and then we have a special built in notation
in Haskell called do notation, where, just as a matter
of engineering the way our brains work, it's much easier
if you get the short name first and then get
the thing that has that short name, because then you
know what to call it.
Then if you give it a possibly long thing, saying
what to do, and then the short name to call
it by.
So the, , the way Haskell works, right?
We need a function here.
So the lambda has to come here.
So we just defined a special notation that says well
you write the name here and a backwards arrow.
And then the function, it looks a little bit
what you do in the list comprehension.
, so this program and this one are just the
same.
So it says do get char bind x to
the result, do get line bind XS to the result.
So that's what's written here.
And this is just a different way of writing the
same thing.
What's most important here is that due notation is written
with curly braces and with semicolons after each of the
command, which makes it look a bit see, C
was the most popular language when Haskell was designed, so
it was helpful to make it look a little bit
that.
But the key thing I said this yesterday, but I'll
repeat it now, is that because Haskell is a functional
language, because you can always bind variables with lambda expressions.
I could just define this.
I didn't need to get Will Partain, who was in
charge of the Haskell compiler, to add this special notation.
I could just write this and experiment with it.
So that's very important.
Haskell puts a lot of power at your fingertips.
That may not always be the most convenient notation, but
it will be a pretty convenient notation for writing things
out in.
So when you become a true programmer, what a true
programmer does is first they decide the the right language
for expressing their solution.
They implement that language, and then they express their solution
in that language.
That's really what programming is about.
And the real power of functional languages is they make
it very easy to define whatever language it is you
need.
So I was doing here with Return and Bind was
basically defining a language that's useful for expressing sets of
commands, sequences of commands, instructions to follow whatever you want.
Okay, so when you write do x one from e1,
x two from e2, e3, and so on, it really
means e1 bind lambda x one.
And then the body of the function is all the
rest of this e2 bind lambda x two and the
body is all the rest of this, and so on.
Okay.
So we just went through what a monoid is right.
If you've got an operator , oh plus and a
value you short for unit such that you is the
unit for oh plus.
So you plus x is x x plus you is
x and x plus y plus z is the same
no matter how you parentheses it.
Right.
There are lots of these around plus and zero times
and one or and false and and true concatenate and
the empty list.
And we saw another one sequence and done.
These are all examples of monoids.
Does anybody.
So this includes the two from Boolean algebra.
Does anybody else have a favourite example of a monoid?
No one.
How about matrix multiplication and the unit matrix?
Any others vector space?
Good.
, so you've got vector addition in the vector
space.
And then the unit is the zero vector.
Right.
Very good.
So just lots of these things.
So a monad is actually very similar to a monoid.
Right.
We've got something a unit which is return, and
we have a property associativity, which is if I
do m bind the result to x and then do
n and bind the result to y and then do
O.
It doesn't really matter where I put the parentheses.
And if I return a value v and then bind
that to x and do m, then that's just
lambda x m applied to v.
Or it's also m with x replaced by v.
If I do m and then do lambda x return
x, which could also I could just write return there.
They mean the same thing.
, then that's just doing M right.
If I do m bind the result to x and
then return x, well, that's the same as if I
just did em.
Okay.
So something satisfying.
These three laws is called a monad, and it doesn't
look .
I mean, if you squint, these look very similar, but
clearly this is doing some extra stuff that this is
not doing.
But there's something called category theory.
And in category three it has such general definitions that
you can actually turn this one into an instance of
the definition in category theory of this one.
So this actually really is a monoid.
So the reason it's called monad is there's this branch
of mathematics called category theory.
it's quite general.
It's a very useful thing for computer scientists to know
because it's basically about taking different systems and how you
relate them.
So it's a generalisation of algebra.
In algebra you have different kinds of algebras and mappings
between them, which are called homomorphisms In categories.
You have things.
They might be algebras, they might be sets, they might
be other thingies.
They're just called objects.
And you have mappings between them which are called arrows.
And very pleased to tell you that the objects in
category theory have nothing whatsoever to do with object oriented
programming, but they are very useful for computing.
, and so if you want to go off and
study it, it's kind of useful.
But an example of this is that right?
You don't need any category theory to understand this.
I just explained it to you.
But the people who first discovered these notions were category
theorists.
So category theory was first developed in the 40s.
In the 50s, they found out that this structure was
quite useful for doing things in algebraic topology, which I
don't know, but this generalisation came out of it, of
having a bind operator and a return operator, which they
had different names for those.
But it's essentially just this idea.
And then Eugenio.
So the reason it's called a monad is it looks
a lot a monoid, but the pun on that
monad is a term used by Leibnitz when he did
philosophy.
, so monads are something we use in computing all
the time to structure side effects.
Actually, when Leibniz was writing about monads, interestingly, he was
using them for abstract data types because we said about
monad is it has no windows through which you can
see it's inside.
So in other words, it's an abstraction where you can
understand it from the outside.
But how it works on the inside is immaterial.
And the most famous sentence you will find in Leibniz
says God is a monad.
So the category theorist, it was called category theory after
Kant's categorical imperative.
They just, , sort of decided as a convention everything
they named, they would give it a name from philosophy.
So this this actually has three parts to it.
, one is the name of the thing that builds
the type.
So for us that's been fixed at IO, but we'll
see.
It can be an arbitrary, , type constructor.
So the arbitrary constructor, the thing that squishes things together,
which is bind, and the thing that just pushes something
into, , into this type, which is called return.
So it was also called a triple, but that's a
very boring name.
Calling them triples when they have three components.
It's sort of calling something, hey, you.
So monad was a much better name because it had
some substance to it.
And , it alluded to things in category theory.
Sorry eluded to things in philosophy.
Let's get this right.
So I've meant so.
I've just shown you the one monad that's built in
to Haskell, which we use for doing stuff.
But in fact, why says what a, , what?
Any programming language is most useful for designing your own
language and then using that to solve your problem.
So I'm going to show you now how are we
doing for time?
Two instances of doing that.
So in general we have , an arbitrary constructor.
So here is how monads are defined in Haskell as
a type class that defines a type class.
So we can always reuse the names return and greater
than greater than equal which I'll pronounce bind.
.
But in general, you just say monad of m.
M is an arbitrary type constructor.
Okay.
Return takes a value of type A for any type
A and returns an m of A.
So before it.
So before m was I o.
So this returned an I o of a.
In general it's just an m of a.
And similarly bind takes an m of a and an
a to m of B and returns an m of
B.
Example lists form a monad.
So here open.
Close is used not to mean the empty list, but
to mean the list type.
Right.
So open close applies to a is what we write.
Open bracket A closed bracket.
The type lists of a.
So return takes an A and gives you a list
of a.
Okay I know a function that does that return of
x returns the list with one thing in it, which
is x.
The return takes a value into a list of that
value and bind.
Hmm.
So bind takes a list of a right because it's
in M of that B list of A and a
function from A to m of b, so that would
be from A to list of b and returns a
list of b.
How would I do that.
Okay so m now stands for list k is a
function that given an element of that list, returns another
whole list.
So this M is a list of type a k
takes an A and returns a list of type b.
So what does bind do here?
Well, if I wrote it as a list comprehension that
would be take x from m, draw x from m,
and then for each x and m, let y be
drawn from k of X and then return that list
of y.
Notice that this is just equivalent to the following recursive
definition.
Empty list bind k is just empty list.
X cons x is bind k is.
Apply k to x.
That will give us a list of b.
.
Take x and bind k on it.
That will give us a list of b.
We've got two lists of B and we just append
them.
Or another way of writing this is m bind k
is just map k over m.
So now we've got a list of list of b
and we concat.
So that collapses that down to a list of b.
And in fact when I was first applying monads I
wasn't doing it for side effects.
I was doing it for this.
To understand what's going on with list comprehensions, I realised
that monads were exactly gave you just enough stuff to
define a list comprehension and set of do notation, we
have what's not in Haskell anymore.
Monad comprehensions where this instead of a list could be
an arbitrary monad do notation turned out to be a
little bit easier for people to use.
And again, when I first did it, I didn't have
that notation available.
So I just wrote things out in this way or
this way.
Again, I could just define it for myself because Haskell's
that powerful.
So it doesn't always give you the exact syntax you
want, but can give you the exact concept that you
want.
, so in fact, do notation and comprehensions are very
similar.
So here let's form all pairs where the first component
is less than the second.
So that would be all pairs I j where I
is drawn from the list one to n j is
drawn from the list I plus one up to n.
Right.
So if we think about pairs of four is going
to be one two, 1314 and then 2324 and then
three fourths all pairs where the first component is strictly
less than the second component.
, but a different way of defining that is I
could use the list monad and use do notation.
I could say do I drawn from one to n
j drawn from I plus one up to n, and
then return ij.
So very important thing about bind in monads, about
guards, in list comprehensions and about do notation is the
thing that you bind in the first one can be
used in the second one.
So the way we get that in, .
The way we get that out of bind is because
the second thing pass to bind is a function.
It can use the value returned by the first one.
So this idea that whatever you do in the first
one can be referred to in the second one is
one reason why monads are so powerful.
So you see.
Right.
So here I've done for a particular list comprehension.
But you could see that you could always change a
list comprehension into do notation, just each drawn from turns
into a bind.
And then the thing at the beginning turns into return
of that thing.
So bind bind bind bind bind bind return Return to
value.
Bind.
Bind.
Bind.
Bind.
Bind.
Bind.
Return.
And this is right here I and J makes use
of things bound here to the right of it.
Here we read from left strictly from left to right.
So we only use things have been bound earlier.
So that's slightly easier from an engineering point of view.
No question yet.
Come on somebody ask a question.
If you don't ask a question I'm going to have
to show you how parsers work.
Right.
Do people want to see.
Yes.
Where's the function.
Now?
Where is the function in in here.
So I just speak a little louder because you're far
away.
Ah right.
So here this is going to turn into use of
bind.
So what function is it?
So the answer is it's the function lambda I followed
by du of all of this okay.
And it went by pretty quickly.
But that's exactly what's written here.
So when we write x drawn from e1 that means
e1 bind lambda x1.
And then the translation of all the rest of that.
Right.
Right.
Good question.
Excellent.
Any other questions?
Yeah.
How do parsers work.
All right.
So now we've got the monad of lists.
Oh I need to show you one other thing before
I show you parsers, which is there's some other things
that you often find in a monad.
So you often find a monad with a plus.
So, , these things form a monoid right?
M0 is the unit m plus is the O plus.
So M0 is just an m of A for arbitrary.
A m plus takes two mas and gives us an
Ma.
And again lists form a monad plus where m0
is the empty list and m plus is concatenate.
And the important.
The important thing is that for any monad with plus
we can then define guard.
So guard takes a bool and returns an m of
the unit type again.
So it only has a side effect.
It doesn't return an interesting value.
What we do is guard a false is M0 guard
of trues.
Do nothing, just return the one thing you can return.
We could also find m some, which takes a list
of ma to an ma, and does that by doing
a folder with m plus and m0.
And one special case.
Now.
, so guards are very useful because they let you
put conditions right.
This generalises the notion of a guard from a list
comprehension to an arbitrary monad.
So now we could put a guard in there.
So now I'm doing something before, except just a
different way of writing the same thing I drawn from
one to n j, drawn from one to n, and
have the condition that I should be less than j.
So we would write that as I drawn from one
to n j drawn from one to n guard I
less than j, and then return I j.
So this maps down to this, this maps down to
this.
And again this is going to return, , all pairs
where the first component is less than the second component.
Okay.
Now I can answer your question.
So a parser of type A, basically what we want
to do is take a string and return a value
of type A.
And for the top level that's fine.
But if you think about it, when we're parsing something
as we go through parsing, it will parse the first
bit.
So we'll read some of the input and there'll be
some input left.
And then we'll parse the second bit.
So we'll read that bit of input and there'll be
some input left and so on.
So you might think of it as something that okay
we give it the input, we return the value that
we parsed and whatever bit of the input we did
not read yet.
Okay.
So this I have defined a side effect within Haskell
itself.
So just using pure Haskell, no notion of side effect.
This is my input string.
This is the remainder of the input string after I've
read some of it.
In general you can simulate arbitrary state in this way.
So one kind of monad which I won't go into
today is the state monad, which lets you pass around
an arbitrary data type as state.
Your state can be whatever you want.
If you're playing, , checkers it the state might be
what's on the checkerboard currently.
Right.
But we've learned about everything in terms of pure functions.
Right.
In the world.
Right.
You can the state is that this is in this
place on the desk.
I can pick it up and put it on that
place on the desk.
So for modelling the real world, having some notion of
state can be useful.
This is how you do it.
Input state whatever value you want to compute paired with
the output state.
So Haskell is powerful enough that you can build into
it modelling arbitrary states.
So our state is going to be the bit of
the string we haven't read yet, except for one thing.
Parser doesn't always work, does it?
And sometimes we've got arbitrary parses, and we're going to
try them and pick the one that works.
So we need to have some way of saying this
parse didn't work.
Or even for an ambiguous string.
There might be multiple ways of parsing it.
So we might want to say here are three possible
parses.
So it's very important to be able to say no
parses.
It did not work.
Or to be able to say, well actually it worked
really well.
Here are three different parses.
Pick the one you .
So what we're going to do instead of just take
returning a value and the new state will take the
input state and return pairs of the value we passed
and the remaining state.
And there will be a list of these things.
And just as Haskell is powerful enough to model the
notion of state.
This shows us that Haskell is powerful enough to model
the notion of nondeterminism.
We're going to do a kind of angelic nondeterminism.
But you learned about non-deterministic state machines.
This is how we modelled it, by having a list
of results and the remaining, , parsed, , string going
into the automaton.
So we did exactly this before for nondeterministic automata.
See, we take a string and we'll return a list
of parse string pairs.
And my colleague Graham Hutton turned this into a little
poem.
A parser for things is a function from strings to
lists of pairs of things and strings, not Doctor Zeus.
Graham Houghton.
, so we're going to find a module.
We want parser to be an abstract type.
So I just defined a data type a parser of
a.
This is a type constructor also named parser.
Right.
And just as the fourth string goes to the list
of a string pairs.
And then to apply a parser, we take a parser
of f and s and we just write apply f
to s, and we get this list of a string
pairs.
, and in particular what parse is going to do.
, this is what you do for a successful parse.
It applies the thing gets the list, checks that we've
parsed the whole thing, and then returns the head of
the list.
So this succeeds if you parse the whole thing.
And there is exactly one parse.
So if you parse the whole input and was unambiguous,
parse will return the result.
So now we need to return, define return and bind.
So return as a parser that takes the un
parsed input and returns the value x and all the
UN parsed inputs so it doesn't change the state at
all.
And m followed by k is.
Take the current state, apply M to S, so that'll
give us a list of XT pairs.
So x is our values.
We apply k to x and then we apply that
to t the new state.
So original state we get a value and a new
state apply k to k of x gives us our
new parser.
Apply that in state T, get out.
Finally, state u and return the final value of y
and the final state U.
And it's also very helpful to have a monad plus
right?
M0 is the parser that always fails.
Right.
Return is the parser that always succeeds.
M0 is the parts of the always fails, and plus
is parse m parse n combine the results.
This is very important because if this one fails, it'll
give you this one.
If this one fails, it will give you this one.
So you have two passes and you want two passes
that you might want to apply.
It lets you choose.
So just parse a given one character is very easy
right?
You'll be given your state is C followed by S,
and just return the value c paired with the
remaining state's.
So we take the first character off of the input
state.
, return that as our as our value, and the
output state is just the remaining string.
And then spot takes a predicate over characters and it's
going to succeed if the character we read satisfies that
predicate.
So this is just this.
If the list is empty, fail here.
Also, if the list is empty, fail if it's non-empty
and p of C holds, then return the key pair
and otherwise fail.
And then token says read a particular character.
That's just spot for equal c.
So if I want to read an open bracket,
that would just be token open closed.
quote open parentheses which is spot of equal of
open parenthesis.
And then matching an entire given string more than one
character would just be.
Well the first one must be x.
The remainder much match XS and then we return that.
And notice that when we do a token, the character
we return is the one that we had to have
read.
And now we can do interesting things parse ,
zero or more things.
So if plus is one or more things than we
do plus of p m plus return empty.
So it might return one or more things, or it
might be returned to the empty list.
It parsed nothing at all.
And then plus of P is going to be read
a p, read zero or more things and return the
list formed by concatenating those together.
So now I can do interesting stuff how do
I parse the natural number?
It's just plus of spot of is digit Right.
One or more digits is going to be a natural.
And let's just see that at work.
So this defines all the different things that we just
saw.
And so now I could do.
Apply of plus of is digit.
To 123.
A b c d e.
What.
Number expect.
Oh, I'm not running in Haskell.
Maybe I should run in Haskell.
That might be better.
oh.
It's broken.
Ah, I know what's wrong.
That's okay.
We're at time.
No demo for you.
That's okay.
, but this would, if given the string one, two,
three a, b c, we return a list of a
pair in the first element that the pair is the
number one is the string one, two, three, and the
remainder would be a b, c.
And we could generalise that to do expressions right.
So an expression is either a literal or sum of
two expressions or product of two expressions.
If I want to parse those, I just do parse
the literal m plus, right?
Do one or the other.
Parsing a sum or partial multiplication and literal is just
passing an integer, and add is read an open parenthesis.
Pass an expression, read a plus.
Parse an expression.
Read a close parenthesis.
Return d plus e.
Using our constructor for expressions and model is very similar.
Read an open parenthesis.
Read an expression.
Read a times.
Read another expression.
Read a closed parenthesis and return d times e.
So you've seen we can build very powerful languages within
Haskell.
Here's a language for describing parsers.
And for example if you do parsecs of one two,
three give you one plus two.
Sorry one plus two times three gives you one plus
two times three.
Right.
There's a paper somebody wrote once called A brief, Incomplete
and Mostly Wrong History of Programming Languages, where he poked
fun at lots of programming language developers.
One of them was me.
So among all these different entries.
One of them said.
So he's got Alonzo Church and Lambda Calculus and Alan
Turing and so on.
And this one, in 1990, a committee formed by Simon
Peyton Jones, Paul Hudak, Philip Wadler, Ashton Kutcher and people
for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, four of those are
correct.
, creates Haskell.
oh.
Three of those are correct.
He left out John Hughes.
How could he leave out John Hughes?
All right.
, creates Haskell a pure, non strict functional language.
Haskell, get some resistance due to the complexity of using
monads to control side effects, Wadler tries to appease critics
by explaining that quote A monad is a monoid in
the category of endo functors.
What's the problem?
I will stop there.
Thank you.
So I will also be giving the guest lecture next
Monday on propositions as types.
That's a fairly famous talk, so I hope to see
you there.
Hi.
Thank you very much.
Oh, thanks.
So you ask the question now.
Does anybody else do any other functional languages?
And, .
Oh.