All right.
Good afternoon everyone.
So last time we talked about categorical statements.
And I ended up trying to convince you that it's
very easy to program categorical statements in Haskell using things
that you've already learned.
You didn't seem terribly convinced by the end of the
lecture.
So I asked you to go away.
Refresh the Haskell you've just learned.
Look at this slide again and come back.
Now, if you still wished to talk about it further.
So who has successfully improved their understanding of what I
was trying to say here?
Who has unsuccessfully tried to improve.
What are the rest of you expecting me to do?
Go over it all again, right.
, that's not an efficient way to proceed.
So let me get on my high horse and remind
you that the key thing about university is that you
do the work.
We provide you the stuff with which to do the
work.
And as I also said early on, this course keeps
a fairly steady pace up to about week six, where
we take a little bit of a break.
So it's really important to keep up.
Of course I plan for this, so we're going to
go over it again anyway.
But for those of you who aren't really sure what's
going on, you're going to need to speak up and
talk about it.
I mean, ideally you can also do that in the
tutorial, but we can take maybe five minutes to go
through this again.
So you've all seen list comprehension.
And you haven't seen list comprehension again since Tuesday, unless
you were one of those people who are going ahead
and doing tutorial two in advance.
But in that case, you probably understand this anyway.
So.
Who has completely for all?
Let me rephrase that.
Who confidently understands this basic Haskell list comprehension?
The simple one with just the X there.
More, more.
Any more?
Okay, so about one 12:45 third.
The way I think of it is because I'm a
mathematician.
So I think of this as Haskell's way of writing
the sets that I'm used to writing from school set
theory.
But not all school set theory is the same.
So let's think about it from a programming point of
view.
This notation is chosen to look set theory.
But Haskell is a program programming language.
So what's it really doing?
The construction means here's a set of variable x.
And remember.
Does everybody remember what the sign means?
Yes.
Anybody not remember what this sign means.
Because if you don't you're stuck here okay.
So element of same as element.
So look at all the x that are elements of
list sorry elements of things.
So this is just taking the list of things and
processing them one at a time.
so in this case.
What did I start with?
.
Ah.
How many have I got?
Oh, Stu w x y z.
Okay, so this is things.
That's what we have here.
And the list comprehension.
Comprehension is saying look at every x.
That is an element of things.
So take these things one at a time.
And this comma here is really just another way of
writing.
And we'll see later in the course other situations in
which we do that.
So in some ways you might think this is a
bit perverse.
Why not.
Right.
And But the way you should think about it is
here's the list of things we're considering.
And having got a list of things to think about,
which is that lot.
We're going to filter them out according to whether they
satisfy this property or not.
So here's the list and here's the property or the
predicate in our language.
And the predicate says x is a triangle and x
is small.
So we're going to go through.
Skip back a couple of slides because I had helpful
diagrams.
We're going to go through all the things all the
every x in things little X and things and say
is it a triangle and small.
And if we do that we find that R isn't.
Y is are not a small triangle because it's a
circle.
S is a small triangle.
Hopefully T isn't.
U isn't, V is.
So then what we've got is a list that has
been filtered.
So filtered is a word that is often used to
describe this process.
You have a view of a whole list of things,
and you want to filter out the ones that you're
interested in.
So in this case we're interested in small triangles.
So starting from the list things this list comprehension gives
us back the small triangular things which are in this
case s v and x.
Does that help with that bit.
Somebody says yes.
Anybody say no because I'm not quite sure what more
to say other than go and program it.
We'll see many more of these.
And of course you will be doing lots of examples.
So this is the basic list comprehension.
Give me a list which comes from a big list
and is filtered out to be just the things I'm
interested in.
The next thing I did you may not have seen
yet in the Haskell side of the course, but all
it's doing is saying, well, instead of giving me the
things that I want, give me the things that I
want and apply this predicate to them.
So if I take x and apply is rid of
x, I get true or false according as red is
x.
So in this case I've got my filtered list s,
v and x, and I'm just returning the value of
whether they are red or not.
And in this particular case.
V is red and the others are false.
So that gives me back a list of Haskell truth
values.
False.
True.
False.
So that's is red of S, is red of V,
and is red of x.
So now I've got a list filtered and I've applied
a function a predicate in this case to it to
give me a set of truth values telling me whether
each of the things I'm interested in is red or
not.
And the final step is a bit of Haskell magic.
So I asked you this last time, but I forget.
Have you already seen the list and function in the
FP?
Somebody thinks you have, but many people probably don't remember.
So.
If I apply and to.
A list.
That's exactly the same as just ending all the lists,
all the elements together.
So just taking a list of truth values, of course,
because this is a Boolean function.
So it works on truth values.
So it's essentially a many place and instead of a
two place and which is very convenient.
, since we've got the board handy.
What is the value of that Haskell expression and of
the empty list?
So I've heard both answers.
So let's think about it for about another 10s.
And let's take a vote.
So who thinks it's false?
Okay.
Who thinks it's true?
Majority and quite a large number of people, as usual,
who are undecided.
I really wish I had an electroshock mechanism.
.
So the answer is true.
And we will see that coming up again in logic.
, I talked did I talk about vacuous for one
of you emailed me before the course or earlier in
the course and asked about and of nothing of the
empty set?
.
It's something that took a long while for logic to
decide that the and of no things should be true.
But let me give you a bit of intuition now,
and we'll come back to it later in the course.
If you think about what and is doing set, theoretically
it's an intersection.
So if I have the and of two properties.
Then and is their intersection then if I add a
third one.
I need to rub out some stuff because only the
bit in the middle is true.
And every time I put another thing in the and
fewer and fewer things are true.
So if I in order for that to make sense,
when I had no predators in the hand, everything must
have been true.
And for those of you who are getting on well
with Haskell and recursion, write out the definition.
Implement the and the list and function in terms of
the binary and function and standard list definitions and see
what you do, what what you get there.
But we're only not thinking about that right now.
We will think about this later on.
So we have and just as an operator, which takes
a list of truth values and collapses them together by
applying and between all of them.
So what's this statement now saying?
It's saying that's is red and V is red and
X is red, which is false because S is not
red.
And in fact, that's enough because it's a list of
ands.
As soon as you see a false value, you know
that it's going to be false.
But what we've done here is take this quantifier first
order looking thing every, which is a nasty, complicated thing
and turned it into a many place.
And and we'll be doing that all the time because
they're fundamentally the same and corresponds to every for all
in the same way that or corresponds to there exists
or some.
Okay.
Does that help a little bit for some of you?
Some.
Probably the best I can hope.
Well, the rest of you.
So you're going to do the tutorial so you will
be forced to think about it.
Use Piazza as and when you have doubts or questions.
As always.
And because time is finite, I will go on to
what is really the main topic.
So this is by way of an example, because we're
going to use this Haskell example in order to check
our understanding of logic and to show how logic can
be programmed.
So Haskell is a 1980s, if I remember rightly, programming
language.
Now we're back in 2300 BC, and this is a
translation of the slightly unhelpful definition, or rather, it's a
slightly unhelpful translation of a definition from Aristotle of what
a syllogism is.
A syllogism is discourse.
In the original word there was logos, this word for
reasoning, discourse, any thing to do with words.
A syllogism is discourse in which certain things being stated.
So you make some assumptions and state them something other
than what is stated.
So you try to show something new follows of necessity
from those things.
This is a very 19th century translation.
I think we might translate it differently today.
So here is the classic example, slightly adapted for modern
sensibilities.
So the standard example of a syllogism goes this.
All Greeks are human.
I think I know some cats who might disagree with
that, but never mind.
So for our purposes, all Greeks are human.
All humans are mortal.
Which is true despite Elon Musk and Co's best efforts
so far.
From that, it follows that all Greeks are mortal.
Do you all accept that as a valid piece of
reasoning?
Does anybody have any doubts about it as a valid
piece of reasoning.
Is to say.
Otherwise, all payments increase.
Ah, yes.
So not all humans are Greeks.
But of course it's not saying all humans are Greek,
so it's not making a statement about humans.
So the fact that all X or y is completely
different from all y or x is important.
, this does of course assume.
Well, no, it doesn't assume anything.
For this to make sense to us, we assume that
Greeks, human and mortal, have their usual meanings.
But could you put any set of adjectives or nouns
in the appropriate places for Greeks, human and mortal?
And this would still make sense.
Okay, so all footballs are bars, all bars of foobar,
therefore all verbals are foobar.
Valid reasoning.
Although It is intentionally nonsensical.
So that's what logic is about producing rules of reasoning
that are valid in all universes, whatever the actual meanings
of these things are.
, just as an aside, I said this was a
slight variation of the classic example of the English version
of the classic example.
Any guesses on what the standard wording of this was?
Up to about 1970.
So yep, all Greeks are men.
All men are immortal.
Therefore, all Greeks immortal.
And if you want, that wasn't just standard sexism of
Europeans.
Go back and read about the position of women in
ancient Greek society.
, they were not actually fully human in the perception
of the time.
But I don't think Aristotle actually said that.
I think he used a word which just meant human,
but it then got translated.
There are many, many, many ways to write a syllogism.
So this is one way of writing it as a
piece of set theory.
And this goes back to what you were saying just
now about Greeks and humans and the other way round.
So here I'm writing this as a piece of set
theoretic notation.
You should be able to read this fluently by now,
because we asked you to revise set theory or learn
it if you didn't get it at school.
So if you don't read this fluently, try to get
to a point where you do it says the set
of x such that x is our Greek is a
subset of the set of x such that x is
a human.
In other words, all Greeks are human.
And then the rest of it is just the same.
So the reasoning is the same.
All I've done is change the language I'm using to
describe the categorical statements.
Modern logic, or at least in modern logic, as we're
going to write it in this course, we tend to
write it this.
So here we've missed out the x.
We've taken the x out of the equation.
And instead of using nouns Greeks, we're just using
predicates everywhere.
So out here there is some kind of implicit well
actually out here for all x x is Greek, implies
x is human and x is human, implies x is
mortal and x is Greek implies X is mortal.
So the sand, the modern logical notation has this horizontal
line.
And what's above the line is the stuff we're assuming.
And what's below the line is the stuff we're claiming
to be true as a consequence or in traditional language
premises and conclusion or consequence.
So this this statement here, this symbol here is pronounced
in various ways, I may sometimes say implies I may
sometimes say entails.
, both of them are slightly awkward because it's being
used in a sense subtly different from either of the
other senses of the word.
But think of this as being a statement that if
the predicate Greek implies the predicate human in the sense
that for any x Greek of x implies human of
x, and that's what this means.
Does it matter what language you write it in?
Well, not really, because it all means the same.
But the advantage of a formal notation is that there
is no room for arguing about what the English means.
And we'll see later on.
Well, actually, even in this example, there is some room
for arguing about what the English means, but we will
come to that a bit later.
, so a few minutes ago I said, does it
matter what symbols we use?
If this is a valid piece of reasoning for Greek,
human and mortal, then it's a valid piece of reasoning
for verbal bangers and foobar or whatever I said.
So we can write it symbolically saying if A entails
B and b entails C, then A entails C, whatever
actual values predicates we plug in for A, B, and
C.
So we've introduced a bunch of new notation.
Any questions about this notation and what it means?
Anybody unclear about the meaning of the basic syllogism?
Sorry the hypothetical.
Is it the same as a hypothetical syllogism?
I don't know, because I don't know what a hypothetical
syllogism is.
It sounds a piece of philosophy.
.
It's so if you ask me.
P implies q, q implies f, p implies f s
or whatever.
Yes.
So that's the same.
, so the reason I'm being slightly cautious is because
there is an x implicit in here.
Whereas if you say p implies q and q implies
r.
Therefore p implies r.
That's a statement of propositional logic as well.
So are we talking about propositions or are we talking
about predicates.
So if you do propositional logic.
Then this is a valid rule of propositional logic.
And we're doing exactly the same thing.
But we're lifting it up to talk about predicates which
apply to objects and not just about simple propositions.
Yeah.
It's a very good question.
, can you have more than one predicate on the
right side here, you mean.
Yes.
We will come to that.
Do you want to hazard a guess as to what
it might mean now?
Yes.
So we will see a bit later that we can
put multiple predicates on the left and multiple predicates on
the right.
But for the moment, we're going to stick to the
classic Greek full form, Aristotle's form, where we just have
one on the left and one on the right.
Okay, now I think we agreed when I first brought
the syllogism up, that this is a piece of valid
reasoning.
Whatever A, B, and C are.
I don't think there's any logic you would want to
work with, in which case in which this is not
a good piece of reasoning because it would be a
very strange world.
Okay, so that's the syllogism.
Syllogisms are what we're going to be working with for
the next couple of weeks.
And the first thing I'm going to do with them
is do a slight diversion into some pictures again, and
discuss a way of checking a syllogism, or indeed another
logical statement to work out whether it's sound or not.
And this is actually a reasonably sophisticated piece of graphical
reasoning that we're going to introduce.
So let's hope it works.
So remember what I did last time I said that
if we're trying to determine whether every red triangle is
small in a particular universe, the universe of things,
then we did something , look at the red region,
look at the triangular region, and see if there was
anything that was outside the small region.
So we were looking for a counterexample.
That was something we did with one particular universe.
I suggested that maybe that's how we think about it
when we do it.
How can we make it more abstract?
Well, what is a Venn diagram?
I suppose the first question is, does everybody remember exactly
what a Venn diagram is?
Who can remember the difference between a Venn diagram and
an Euler diagram?
Well, that's fair enough, because I didn't know the difference
until I started teaching this course, and I'm not sure
I ever had known it.
You will see Euler diagrams used sometime.
The main difference is that they don't include the whole
universe.
So this is the whole universe.
Here we have the three properties within the universe the
A things, the B things and the C things.
And that gives us eight possible regions as we were
talking in the first lecture about coding stuff.
And so we can naturally give a binary code to
each of the regions of the diagram.
So this stuff is the outside and it's 000 because
it's where A is false, B is false, and C
is false.
This region here is 011 because it's where A is
false, B is true and c is true and so
on.
So we have a nice simple binary notation to describe
the eight regions of a Venn diagram.
And we can think about programming that up.
And I don't think I'm going to make you programming
it up.
But it's quite fun to do.
So having got a way to talk about all the
possible combinations of three Predicates or three properties.
Rather, predicates say, then we can use a Venn diagram
to do reasoning about the relationship between them.
And it works because the Venn diagram covers every possible
way that the properties can combine in truth, true and
false.
I'm going to introduce a bunch of notational conventions.
These are not universal notational conventions.
You might see different ones elsewhere, but hopefully in this
course we will be fairly consistent.
So when I draw a diagram this, I'm going
to use light grey shading this to indicate graphically
that this region here has nothing in it.
What is this region?
It's where A is false and B is true and
C is true.
So this is the assertion that there are no objects
in this region.
Okay.
With that.
As a notation.
Hopefully it's intuitive.
That says you can't go there.
Sometimes I want to say that there is something in
one of these regions.
And the notation there is a slightly trickier.
I'm just going to choose a random letter x
and write it in there.
And what I mean by doing that in this form
of reasoning is to say that there is something in
this region here, which is where A is true and
B is true, and C is false.
Okay.
So that's Venn diagrams and two pieces of notation for
talking about whether there is something in a region.
And if you're reading textbooks you will see people use
the word inhabited to say is a region inhabited or
not?
It's not okay as a piece of notation.
Any questions?
We'll see.
There is a question you might ask, but we'll probably
come to it.
Why am I doing this?
Well, I'm doing this because I want to introduce Venn
diagrams as a way to look at something which somebody
claims to be a syllogism and work out whether it
is or not.
There are many other ways of doing that.
We will see two others at least.
So here's my categorical statement.
This says A entails B, or in other words, every
A is B.
Here's a large number of other ways of saying it.
But this is every a is B a entail speed?
So if we look at the Venn diagram for A
and B it's got these four regions.
And what are we saying when we say A entails
B.
We're saying that region has nothing in it.
So this is the region where A is true and
B is false.
That's exactly what is ruled out by the statement that
every A is B.
So if every Greek is human, this region is the
region of non-human Greeks.
So what do you think?
It's reasonable to say that this Venn diagram captures exactly
the meaning of this statement.
And.
Distinct shortage of nods.
Are you willing to believe me for the moment until
you've had a chance for it to sink in?
So let me remind you of the general idea of
lectures.
It's not necessarily the case that you're going to understand
everything in the first time.
But when you go back through it, which you do,
don't you?
And incidentally, one of the ways I screwed up badly,
as I told you, was by not going through lectures
afterwards.
So do make a habit of it.
, so if this is an interpretation of the categorical
statement, every A is B, then maybe we can interpret
syllogisms by plugging together diagrams.
So here's an attempt to look at the classic syllogism
and represent it as some diagrams.
Every a is B.
Every b is C, every A is C.
Here are the three diagrams.
The three individual diagrams.
Every a is B, every b is C for C.
How do I plug Venn diagrams together?
, if I were slightly better at doing fancy slides,
this would be animated, but there are limits to my
patience.
So it isn't animated makes life easier if we rotate
the diagrams a bit so that we can bring them
together.
So I'm going to rotate that diagram and rotate that
diagram.
What happens if I merge these two.
So B is shared between the two diagrams.
And a and C are separate.
So I can represent them as a merged diagram
that.
Why are the shadings of this region as they are.
So if I look at this region here, why is
there nothing in it?
Does it corresponds to there?
All right.
So it's ruled out by that bit which we can't
see over there.
On the other hand, this one has nothing ruling it
out.
So.
This is a way of combining a diagram for two
propositions into a diagram that expresses both of them at
the same time.
How do we extract the bottom one?
So the logic we're trying to prove is that A
entails c every a is C.
Sorry, every Greek is mortal.
So what we do is we take the B and
we pull it out.
So if B disappears what happens?
Well you might think that this happens.
So I've just removed B from the diagram.
But what I'm left with now is this region which
is half empty and half not necessarily empty.
If I have a region, half of which is empty
and half of which is not necessarily empty, what can
I say about the whole region?
So we are not necessarily empty.
So this is actually the same as that.
, the way I sometimes to think about this
is that this is all about white paint.
When I pull the B away, the white paint spills
out and covers the rest of the region because white
paint is good stuff.
Using lots of stereotypes about colours and it spreads.
It means there might be something here.
And so if you remove a barrier between a white
bit and a grey bit, the white flows out into
the grey bit.
Being a nice solid covering paint.
And this process, each step of it made sense.
So I conclude from that that if A entails B
and b entails C, I plug them together.
Takeaway b I get this diagram.
And this is the diagram for A entails C.
So my graphical reasoning technique has produced the same answer
as the statement of the syllogism there.
And therefore I conclude that this syllogism is sound in
any universe.
You will be doing a bit of practice of this.
It's interesting.
Why is it interesting?
Partly because reasoning with diagrams is something that all mathematicians
do, but is not something that all mathematicians write down
in the published paper.
Because when you draw stuff, you're not being precise most
of the time.
And it's interesting to think about whether it's possible to
reason with diagrams in a way that is precise.
And what we're doing here can be turned into something
that is precise.
And for those of you who that kind of
thing.
Go away and think about making this more precise.
For example, by programming it, implement Venn diagrams.
Think of a way of doing it.
But for the rest of you, this is a way
of saying, if I have a syllogism, is it sound
or not?
And we'll see examples of variations on syllogisms that are
not sound.
So I'll come back to that when I've got some
more examples.
But now I want to introduce you to a very
important word, a very important name.
This syllogism here is the one we've been talking about
so far.
The only example you've seen so far has a name,
and its name is Barbara.
I'm not going to explain why it's called Barbara until
later.
If you have a burning desire to find out right
now.
Well, preferably not right now, preferably after the lecture.
If you really want to know why it's called Barbara?
Go and look in Wikipedia.
But be prepared for a substantial time of confusion, because
ancient logic was much harder to deal with than modern
logic.
But I will explain this in week six, I think,
for anybody who wants to.
And because this is, in a sense, the fundamental syllogism,
it's quite useful to have a name for it.
So I'm going to call it Barbara all over the
time.
, and it has the form that if the premises
of the things above the line are valid, then the
conclusion below the line is valid.
So this is the simplest form of syllogism.
It's all A or b, all B, A, C or
ASC.
What other statements can we make?
Instead of saying all A or B, we can say
no a is B .
Thank you for plausible.
No.
No reptile has fur.
Okay.
Which is currently true.
, this is also a statement that is asserting a
universally true statement in the universe.
So in the universe we live in, reptiles do not
have fur.
So if you give me a reptile, I can tell
you it doesn't have fur without looking at it.
But from our point of view, this is really the
same as saying every A is not B, every reptile
does not have fur and is not furry.
So from a modern point of view it doesn't look
very different.
But from Aristotle's point of view, it did look different
because he didn't have the modern, refined understanding of how
negation works, and he understood perfectly well how it worked.
But he didn't look at it in quite the same
way as we do.
So here's an example.
Oh, look, it's an example of a syllogism involving reptiles,
snakes and fur.
All snakes are reptiles and tails are no reptile has
fur.
Ah entails not f no.
Therefore no snake has fur S entails not f.
Is this just an instance of Barbara that we've been
discussing?
Lots of nods.
Anybody disagree?
Anybody think of a way that they could disagree if
they were feeling being awkward?
Okay, well, Let's.
Should be able to think of a way to try
to argue against it.
, it works for us.
Because for us, not F is a predicate.
So being not furry is just as good a predicate
as being furry is.
And where Aristotle differed is that he didn't have a
way of building new predicates out of old ones.
So he didn't have the idea that there was a
predicate, not furry.
He didn't have the idea that there was a single
predicate Greek and mortal, and that made everything much more
complicated.
So for us, it is an instance of Barbara, because
a negated predicate is also a predicate.
And there was actually another reason why Aristotle didn't quite
understand negation in the sense that we do, and we
will come on to that later as an optional exercise.
So if you were learning logic 600 years ago instead
of now, this would not have been called Barbara.
It would have been called, depending on which country in
Europe you were in, sell or rent or rent.
.
We'll actually chill out and chill out and and cellar
and.
, but for us, it looks the standard proposition.
So what do universal statements look in Venn diagrams?
Here's the one we've already seen.
Every A is B and no A is B, so
no A is B says the middle is empty.
There is nothing that is both A and B here
I've got a entails B here I've got a entails,
not B.
There are two other things I could do.
I could write not A entails B and I could
write Not A entails, not B.
So if I draw the Venn diagrams for those statements,
I get that.
Right.
So not A entails B that says that if if
I'm outside A, then I must be in B, so
that means there is no completely outside region.
Nothing is in there.
And this says if A is not true, if I'm
outside A, then B must not be true.
So that region is empty.
, just looking at these diagrams, what do you notice
about them?
That's haven't had anything from the back recently.
Somebody from the back noticed something.
Yeah.
They are mirror images.
There's a lot of symmetry here.
So these two are mirror images of each other.
And these two aren't mirror images.
But there's something going on.
This is a blanking out the middle and this is
blanking out the outside.
So if we look at these two these are the
exact mirror images.
So A entails B is the mirror image of not
A entails not B.
If I now swapped b and A here.
So suppose I wrote not B entails not a, what
diagram would I get.
The first one.
So this tells us that not B entails sorry, not
a entails.
Not B is the same thing as B entails A.
This is a very, very useful piece of reasoning, and
it's one that the lawyer I've been moaning about did
not understand.
, so this said, if all non Greeks are non-human,
then all humans are Greek, which is would be surprising.
If you've done proofs in mathematics.
So some of you have done proof in mathematics at
schools.
Some of you have not really done proofs in the
modern sense, but you are doing them because you're going
to get proofs throughout first and second year maths.
Then it's often useful to take a statement of I
know a I'm trying to prove be.
I try instead to say, if not be holds, then
let me show that not A holds.
So that's called proof by contra position.
You try to prove the opposite direction, but you have
to negate things.
So we will see this happening again and again and
again in many cases.
The other thing we can see is that these two
diagrams are mirror images of themselves.
So this is symmetrical.
It's its own mirror image.
And so is this.
So that tells us that if we swap A and
B it's still the same.
So A entails not B is the same as b
entails, not A.
They are again contra positives.
Likewise down here not A entails B is the same
as not B entails A, so you will be getting
used to flipping these back and forward time and again.
And we'll talk a little bit more about the theory
of it next week.
, I'm going to.
Keep going for a little bit.
So what's going on here.
What's going on here is that we're using negation.
And we're also flipping things from one side of and
tail sign to another.
So negation and composition are intimately linked.
And this is one of the things that Aristotle didn't
completely get.
Fortunately, we have a nice idea of negation that works
well.
So in modern logic and in several modern languages, then
we have the law of double negation.
We discussed that in the first lecture.
In logic, if I say not, not a, then that's
the same as a if not, not Greek is the
same as Greek.
And I asked you to think about that so you
can discuss it in tutorials if you did think about
it.
So the law of composition, which describes what I was
doing in those diagrams, says that if A entails B
is true, then not B entails not A is true
and the other way round.
So this is an if f does anybody not recognise
I f?
Okay.
It's a very convenient abbreviation that mathematicians use all the
time.
We pronounce it as if and only if and it
means and if that goes both ways.
So if I write p if q that means if
p then q and also if q then p.
So that means that p and q have the same
truth values.
They're the same.
So it's not this one way.
If that was confusing people earlier on.
.
So well-behaved mathematicians will read it out as if and
only if mathematicians who are getting fed up might just
say if.
So what we have here is a piece of reasoning
from contribution contribution that says a if A entails B
if and only if not B entails not A if
and only if not, not A entails not not b.
That's.
And then I apply the law of double negation.
And then that gets me to a entails b again.
So by combining these two things I can say that
these two statements are exactly the same.
From this I can deduce this.
And if I have this, I can deduce this.
So sometimes not all that often we will write this
double line here in order to indicate that this is
a rule that goes both ways.
So normally rules go downwards.
We start with the assumption.
And the rule tells us the conclusion.
If we write a double line, we mean we can
also just flip the rule upside down.
And it still works, which is usually not the case.
Although in most of our examples it will be.
But in most of logic it's not necessarily the case.
Okay, so in the last 30s let me just review
what we have covered today.
We've agreed or hopefully we've agreed that we know about
double negation.
So two knots are the same as no knots at
all.
We've talked about Barbara, which we agreed was valid and
we talked about contra position.
So next week we will work on these some more.
So obviously we'll start by reviewing them.
And then we'll see lots and lots more syllogisms.
So enjoy FP tomorrow.