All right.
Good afternoon.
So yesterday I talked about this useful property of circuits
that they can use the same output more than once.
And we can think of doing the same thing with
formulae.
So yesterday we ended up with a circuit looking
this.
And we gave additional variable names to the outputs of
all the gates, wrote it down that and got
an equal satisfiable formula.
So if we can make the original circuit output true
by putting appropriate values for A, B and c, then
we can make this bunch of formulae all true together
by choosing appropriate values.
And we discussed a bit at the end that all
these variables that we've introduced are not really giving any
new information because they're all precisely defined in terms of
the original variables, but they allow us to reduce the
complexity of the formulae we're looking at, and that will
be made precise in a moment.
I asked you yesterday to go through these slides and
come back with any questions or clarifications that you wanted
before we finish off with the actual formula work.
Are there any questions?
Okay, so the point of the circuits is actually to
do the logic.
So the setting transformation does with formulae what we've just
done with gates and the idea is, if you think
of every bracket in a formula as being a gate.
When I drew gates, they were binary gates and or
nor.
We can do exactly the same thing with formulae.
When you draw out, write out a formula with all
its brackets.
Then every bracket corresponds to a logic gate.
So if we look at a formula, we can simply
give a label to every bracket inside it and define
a new variable.
It says see live demo here.
So this is where we hope that things still work
after yesterday.
So here's a formula.
It's not quite the same formula as on the previous
slide.
It's got a few other operators on it.
This is as big as I can get.
Can you read it at the back.
Yep.
, so this formula says it's the negation of a
implies b and c or not a no, c or
not a, of course, is also known as a implies
c, so I'm just ringing the changes by using different
boolean operators to make it look a little bit more
complicated than it is.
If I look at this as a formula, it's only
got one outside operator the and which combines these two.
So if we take the circuit idea, what we will
end up doing is giving a name to the formula
A implies B and a name to the formula C
or not A, and then define those new names to
be equivalent by directionally equivalent to the original formula.
And with a bit of luck.
I get those formulae.
, I'm doing this automatically, of course, which means I
have to make choices for variable names.
And since I use all sorts of letters as variable
names, I decided that the right thing to do here
is to use the letter C, which is the first
letter of setting as my root variable, and then the
other variables are called say 00001, according to which way
I'm going in the tree.
It makes it nice and easy to program the creation
of variable names, as well as Honoré honouring the inventor.
So if I apply the transformation to this formula, what
do I get?
I get this thing, say, which is the whole formula,
and then I get the whole formula is equivalent to
not of this bracket, whole bracket, which is say zero.
And then what is say zero?
Well, say zero is the end of the two things
either side of it, so that say zero zero and
say zero one.
What?
Say zero zero.
Well, it's defined b a implies b and likewise say
zero one is in defined b c or not a.
So that's given me a bunch of 4 million.
If I make all these true at once, then I've
made the original formula true and found a satisfying assignment
for A, B, and C that makes phi true.
And coincidentally, I've also got values for the other formulae,
but they're determined anyway.
Now yesterday I said, why is this a win?
We talked a bit about yesterday.
What happens if you take an arbitrary formula and try
to convert it to DNF to CNF using Boolean algebra?
And if you remember yesterday, the procedure for converting stuff
to boot to CNF with Boolean algebra was get rid
of the implication and by implication, push negation inward.
Distribute until you push all the ORS inside all the
ands.
And that could be a big lose, because if you
have a big bunch of all of ands inside a
bunch of ores, you do a lot of distribution and
the formula blows up in size.
When we do this transformation, what we've done is produce
a bunch of formulae, all of which are short.
So because I give a new label to every bracket
in the formula, there are never more than two variables
on the right hand side of this by implication.
So every formula I produce as the output of sesshin
is a free variable formula, which means that if I
convert it to CNF, it can't blow up very much.
, so now what we have is a bunch of
formulae Which are satisfiable with our original thing.
And if we make them all true, so we make
the end of them true, then we've made the original
thing true.
So now what we do is say, well, I want
to take the end of all these things.
So for each one of these formulae, then I'm going
to convert it to CNF and then just end them
all together.
So my the output of certain looks .
A bunch of formulae with bi implications.
And I'm just going to convert each one of them
to CNF.
Which means it looks that and and of AWS.
And if I take an and of a bunch of
CNF formulae, then I still have a CNCF formally.
And because all these formally on the right hand side
are very short, that means I end up with a
CNCF formula, all of whose clauses are small.
And that's good because that means GPL probably runs quite
quickly.
I say probably because there's no guarantee.
, so I said that what we do is convert
all these formula to CNF.
Well, if I do that, what happens?
I get a formula that looks that.
So you'll see that the original outermost formula stays the
same.
And then there's a bunch of formulae which have been
converted in various ways.
This is slightly tedious to do manually, and it's looking
quite long, right?
It's looking a good deal longer than the original formula,
but it's not too bad.
Does this look it's a win?
Somebody thinks it does look a win.
It's not very obviously a win at this stage, is
it?
Because is this formula easier to solve than just converting
this to CNF directly?
, I mean, if I convert.
The original thing to CNF directly, it looks that.
So this this is doing CNF by the procedure with
Boolean algebra.
So I'm taking my original Phi which has just gone
off the screen hasn't it.
So I'm taking my original file and just pushing negation
in and distributing appropriately.
I get four clause formula.
When I did the session transformation.
I've got this rather longer formulae formula which does not
look as if it's a win.
However, sometimes it's quite a large win.
So to demonstrate that, I'll show you a different formula.
.
This formula is not all that long, but it's got,
what, 12 variables in it.
Assuming I've used the alphabet correctly and it has a
structure which might look a bit worrying.
So I've got lots of ands on the inside, so
I've got ants on the inside and lots of ors
joining them together.
So how long do you think this formula is going
to get?
If I convert it to CNF just by the kind
of manipulation that we did yesterday?
If anybody advances, I don't know.
I mean, let's just do it right.
, let's see if I can scroll back and find
the beginning.
So three screens full.
, which is perhaps a little bit surprising, but it's
a demonstration of how this.
Short formula.
By the time you've pushed all the ands, all the
ORS inside all the ands and distribute it over them,
you get three screens fulls of clauses.
On the other hand, if I do set in to
it.
Then that, of course, just introduces a bunch of new
variables, and I get something more or less the same
length as I started with.
And then if I apply, if I convert all these
clauses individually to normal form, none of them are long,
so nothing is going to blow up.
So I get one screen for PSI one and a
half screen fulls of shorter formulae.
These are small examples.
Now imagine the difference when there were 10,000 variables in
the clauses in the formula.
The difference is between completely impossible and maybe possible.
If you go on to do some of our later
courses, you will find how this technique is useful for
proving interesting complexity theoretic results, but we're not going to
talk about that here.
So what I've just done is show you that with
particularly nasty formula formulae, when you convert it to CNF
by doing straightforward manipulation, the formula blows up exponentially in
the true sense of the word, while the section transformation
of it is only growing up linearly as the formula
gets bigger.
, which is much of the time very good.
I have to say that it still doesn't solve all
the problems.
What have I done?
Settings.
Transformation is a linear order n conversion of a formula
to an satisfiable CNF formula, which is a great deal
better than converting your formula to an exponentially bigger formula.
But it doesn't guarantee that you can find a satisfying
assignment quickly, because finding a satisfying assignment is still an
exponentially difficult problem anyway.
But it does at least remove one source of exponential
blow up.
, why have I been talking about formula in CNF?
How long does it take to check satisfiability of a
DNF formula?
Would that be easier?
DNF formula looks that.
If I'm looking for assignments of the variable that make
it true.
What would it be enough to do?
Find one clause.
So on the face of it, it looks as if
it's a bit dumb to be looking at CNF.
Why am I looking at CNF?
If I have a formula in DNF, then I can
just go through the clauses one at a time, and
then each clause looks A and B and not
D, and it's easy to see how to make that
true.
You just have to make all of them true.
Okay, so in this case I would have to make
a true, b true and d false.
So if you give me a formula in DNF, what's
the complexity of finding a satisfying assignment.
Linnea just go through it one clause at a time.
If you can make any clause true, the whole thing
is true.
So you're done.
So is it the case that I've wasted your time
for an hour and a half by telling you something
useless?
Probably not, because we wouldn't do that.
So why is it not a solution to say, well,
put all your formula in DNF if you want to
find a satisfying assignment.
Yeah.
It's not satisfiable.
That does not exist, right?
I mean, if the formula is not satisfiable, then you
will find that you can't satisfy any clause because there's
a contradiction in every subclause in some subclause of every
clause.
.
So I said, just put everything into DNF, as if
that's easy.
Is it easy to put any formula into DNF?
No.
There's the magic word, which comes up very frequently to
explain why that's an obvious statement.
DNF and CNF are completely symmetrical.
That's the lovely thing about logic and an or completely
symmetrical.
If it is hard to put a formula into CNF
because it might blow up exponentially, then it's also hard
to put a formula into DNF because it might blow
up exponentially.
And the key difference is that with CNF, we have
this setting transformation, which can reduce the chance of hitting
a formula that is going to blow up.
And there's no equivalent of this for DNF and advanced
exercises.
Go and look into that and see if you can
work out why.
.
So this is as much as we're going to do
about the hard problem of finding satisfying assignments.
Let me emphasise that finding satisfying assignments to a formula
is a very, very practically important problem, because any other
propositional logic problem and many, many other kinds of problems
can be turned into finding a satisfying assignment.
So I mentioned timetabling, but there are countless others, and
there is a big industry in trying to do it
faster.
So I've told you that we know.
No.
Well, I've told you that we don't know whether we
can't do it.
We believe we can't do it efficiently.
In the general case, we don't know because that's P
equals NP.
But there's an enormous industry in trying to find algorithms
that are slightly faster.
In particular cases where the problem has a nice property
and there are competitions every year, and people try to
do slightly better than everybody else according to various benchmarks.
Not something that has ever interested me, but some people
doing that and the big companies.
So the Facebook's and the Microsofts and the whatever your
favourite tech giant of the year is actually put quite
a lot of money into solving sat fast because they
use it all the time.
Okay, any questions about what we've done?
Probably takes a little while to sink in, and you
might need to think about why it was useful to
do, but a lot of the time it makes finding
satisfying assignment doable when otherwise it wouldn't be.
Okay, I have half an hour.
I now want to switch to a case where finding
a satisfying assignment is maybe not so hard.
So let's think about slightly simpler formulae.
If you've got a formula in CNF, then it's an
and of ORS.
Suppose we say let's only stick to nice small formulae.
So over here on the CNF, I was CNF.
I had two variables on each side.
So I actually have three variables in each clause.
But suppose I was actually really restrictive and said I'm
going to write down formulae that are in CNF.
So the end of bunch of ORS.
But every clause is an order of only two variables,
not three.
Do you think it might be easier to find a
satisfying assignment for such things?
Yes.
I wouldn't be asking otherwise, would I?
Because otherwise it wouldn't be very interesting.
, it's actually much easier.
So if you think about it a bit.
Well, maybe quite a lot.
You will see eventually that you can find a satisfying
assignment in linear time.
It's really about looking for contradictions.
We're not going to go into , direct direct algorithm
for, for that.
But what we're going to do is think of this
as a gateway into another problem, which is sometimes important,
which is not so much.
Is there a satisfying assignment as how many satisfying assignments
are there, for example, timetabling problem, how many different timetables
are there?
Not something you want to know, but in other cases,
you might want to know how many solutions there are.
And I'm going to be quite honest with you here.
The topic of the next half hour is something that
is here primarily because Mike Foreman partly invented it and
really likes it, and he gave a nice party on
Wednesday, so I'm feeling nice towards him.
So I shall continue to tell you about our accounting
rule.
It's quite cute.
So it's a nice little mathematical exercise.
, but when do formulae this arise?
If you have a formula that has two variables, then
it's maybe not terribly complicated, but it's the kind of
thing that happens a lot when you're writing rules about
things.
, how many of you had difficulty choosing your outside
courses?
How many of you had difficulty working out whether you
are allowed to take an outside course, right?
, the DRP is quite interesting because it has prerequisites
and co requisite constraints that are actually expressed in disguised
propositional logic.
, and here is a non Edinburgh version of this.
At this point I've forgotten what some of these words
mean but never mind.
so a formula that might be a description
of a timetable in an institution, which I'm sure you
can guess where it says you can't take astrology and
pyromancer at the same time.
And if you take Bella mansi, you must take Cairo
Mansi, and you must take either astrology or Bella mansi.
And if you take Cairo Mansi, you must take dream
interpretation and so on.
, you might think that our course prerequisites and co
requisites are not as absurd as this, but sometimes they
can be because when different schools are dreaming up different
restrictions, they would to put on people, you get
some quite complex messes.
, those of you who are fanatical about these things
will now be on your phones.
Just out of idle curiosity, is there anybody who already
knew what all these things mean?
Last year there was.
Which was deeply worrying.
Okay.
, I think Bella mansi is shooting arrows and seeing
how far they go, but I may be confused.
, so if that's a bunch of rules about what
courses you can take, how can you find out which
courses you can take?
You're looking for a satisfying assignment.
Now, a nice thing about two variable clauses is that
we can turn things into implications.
What I've got here is a bunch of.
What's this?
This is a forbidden, correct forbidden combination.
This is a prerequisite.
This is a forced choice.
You must take one of something and so on.
But remember that implies is defined in terms of or
and not.
And similarly we can define and and or in terms
of not and implies.
So I can rewrite all these clauses so that they
have implications in them.
Now why would I do that.
That doesn't seem a useful thing to do.
But you'll see that it has a benefit, at least
for this piece of mathematical fun.
You should check that I have converted this formula correctly
into a bunch of implications, just to check A or
B Well, A or B is .
The same as A, not a implies B, because not
A implies B is the same as B or not.
Not a, which is the same as b or a.
If you remember back to your Venn diagrams, then there's
some symmetry here which we could exploit, but we don't
need to talk about that today.
What's the point?
Why is implication a nice operator?
Implication is a nice operator because it's transitive.
If I know that b entails.
So b implies c and c implies d, then I
know that b implies d.
This is something that we've seen since week one, right?
In different variations.
If these were sequence this would be the Barbara rule.
But now we're working at the level of proposition And
there it's called modus ponens if you're a traditional logician.
But it just says the obvious thing is true.
, no, because implication is transitive.
I can now start drawing diagrams of the various variables
in the whole formula, with implication lines between them.
So if I look at this formula, I know that
b implies c because it says so there.
And I know that c implies d because it says
so there.
And I know that d implies not b because it
says so there.
And I know that false implies anything, and I know
that anything implies true because that's just the way things
behave.
What does this tell me?
If I've got this chain of things, what do I
learn About the the variables, or rather the literals mentioned
in it.
For example, if C is true, what do I know
about the other variables in the chain?
D must be true because c implies d.
And because d implies not b and c implies d
implies not b.
I know that if something is true, then everything to
the right of it has to be true.
So setting one variable true automatically sets a whole bunch
of it.
Sorry, your your way around a whole bunch of variables
to the right, true and symmetrically.
Everything to the left of a false variable must be
false.
So if I make this variable true, then everything over
there.
Sorry.
I make this variable false.
Everything over there must be false.
.
So I know something about the relationship.
But what I know is that if I look at
this chain somewhere, it switches from things being false to
things being true.
There's one point where there's a switch, because everything to
the left of that point is false, and everything to
the right of that point is true.
So that's made the whole problem of finding an assignment
much simpler.
I also know something because I've got a B here
and not be here.
What do I know about B from its position in
the graph?
It must be zero.
It must be zero.
If b implies not b, that means not.
B has to be truer than be.
So not be.
Has to be true and B has to be false.
So the chain of implication there has told me quite
a bit about the variables just by looking at a
simple graph.
And of course I also know that if c is
true, d is true.
.
What should I do with the things I haven't mentioned
yet?
Well, we're going to think about those in a moment.
But if I've got this partial graph and I'm looking
for a satisfying assignment, then I know that there aren't
so many of them.
If I look at this chain, I know that it
has to switch from being false to true somewhere.
Maybe it switches there.
No, I can't have that because I know B has
to be false.
Okay, so maybe it switches there.
So I have a satisfying assignment that goes false true
true true.
Or I could have one that goes false false true
true.
Or perhaps I could have one that goes false false
false true.
So the lesson here is that I can find and
even count satisfying assignments by looking at this graph and
trying to cut it in half.
So find choosing some point where I can draw a
boundary between everything that is false, that goes to the
left, and everything that is true to go to the
right.
So that does two things.
It gives me a satisfying assignment, and it even lets
me count how many satisfying assignments there are, which is
occasionally useful.
Okay, so that's the simple case.
Any questions on what we're doing there?
I'll go on to a slightly more complicated case.
So what this is about is a general generalisable rule.
If I give you a formula, you can turn it
into a bunch of.
If I give you a formula where every clause has
just two variables in it, you can turn all those
clauses into implications.
Then you can draw this diagram.
And then just by using your human intuition, you can
draw lines through the diagram and chop it into two
halves a true half and a false half.
So this is something that might cause the arrow rule.
If we draw out the full graph of implications, and
then we try to cut the graph in half.
Such that everything below the line is false and everything
above the line is true.
We will get a satisfying assignment for the formula.
There are, of course, a few catches that we have
to think about.
So let's look at an example.
Here's a little formula.
Not R or q and not r or s.
If I turn that into implications it says r implies
q and r implies s.
What does the graph look ?
Well we've got two disconnected things here.
So this tells us that our implies Q and this
tells us that our implies S.
But nothing in the formula connects q and S in
any way.
So we don't know anything about the relation between q
and s.
So there are no lines between them.
And always zero implies everything, and everything implies one or
true.
So what we're looking for is ways to cut the
graph in half such that one is above it and
zero is below it, and then everything that lies above
the cut is true, and everything that lies below the
cut is false.
, how many ways are there to do that in
this graph?
Do I see 5.5?
Let's hope that that's right, because right now I can't
count.
Anybody want to go for another number just in case?
Let's see what we get.
So we can cut across the top, making everything fall
so that works.
We can cut down there making these two things false.
We can cut down there making these two things false.
That's three we can cut.
They're making just are false.
And there's the fifth.
So we could make everything true.
And all of those are satisfying assignments because of the
way the implication graph is drawn.
So this is a kind of graphical intuitive way not
only to find assignments, but to count how many there
are.
There are, should you wish to know that.
So I think it looks a bit more impressive with
a more dramatic example.
So let's have a more complex formula.
, this one has one, two, three, four, five clauses.
And if I draw it out again we get a
implies b.
B implies c, c implies d.
So I've got a chain going up there.
And then I've got a to e and e to
D.
So I've got a chain going there.
These two chains come together at D.
So it's going to unify at the top.
And now again the question is how many cuts are
there again without cheating.
How many do we get.
Somebody said eight.
I'm not going to count because why should I count
when I've got the answer in a few slides?
Anybody go for anything other than eight?
So that one.
That one.
That one.
That one.
That one.
That one.
That one.
That one.
And that one.
So that's one cut that goes above de and then
cuts across the Pentagon.
You can imagine that you can actually compute these by
looking at this shape.
I know that this has three things three steps on
this side and two on this side.
So they're going to be six ways to cut that.
And then there's the one that cuts below that.
if you think this is too simple then the
textbook has an even more complicated example.
But I don't particularly wish to do a more complicated
example of this kind of counting.
So you get the idea here.
If I gave you a random bunch of formulae, you
could draw it out and you could count this, you
might get it wrong because it's humans counting.
But the idea should work.
But there are a bunch of things that I haven't
talked about.
So back on the very first example, there was an
A and A, not A in it.
And I haven't talked about that.
I've given you easy cases where everything is positive.
There aren't any nots here.
So if I go back to the first formula.
I've got a formula that originally had a, not a.
And by the time I'd converted everything into implications, then
the nots disappeared.
But I ended up with not B's instead.
So now I have a implies B and a implies
not B.
, what does that tell us?
Fe implies B and A implies not be a must
be false because at least one of B and not
be as false.
And if A implies false, then it must be false.
How can we turn that into a kind of graphical
rule?
So if I draw the implication chain in the way
that I did on the previous slide, it looks as
if we have all these cuts, but I can't have
a cut that gives B and not be the same
value.
So if I cut across here, this cut here, that's
not going to work because that would make both B
and not be false.
And if I cut below here that would make both
B and not be true.
And that doesn't work either.
So I have to be careful about what my idea
of a valid cut is.
So on the previous slide, I said that valid cuts
have to separate zero and one, but they also have
to separate any two complementary literals.
So the only cuts that survive this filter are that
one because that separates B and not be that one
which separates B and not b, and that one which
separates b and not b.
And so that gives us three cuts, three different satisfying
assignments.
, and that works in general for dealing with complementary
literals as long as things aren't too complicated.
I mentioned that we have some symmetry here.
If you remember back to your Venn diagrams a or
not be sorry, A implies not B is the same
as B implies, not a.
So sometimes we can actually get rid of some of
the complimentary literals and make life easier.
But not always.
That's just a sideline.
, can things get more complicated?
I mean, I've drawn graphs which are nicely going up,
right?
Which is how you would a graph to go
up.
But is there any reason you can't have a graph
with a loop in it?
So there's a formula A implies b, b implies c,
c implies not A, not a implies d, d implies
a.
If I try to draw that.
Then I have a graph with implication loops in it.
What can I say about loops in a graph.
So I've got a implies b implies c implies not
a implies d implies a.
Yeah.
That tells me a lot about these things because they
must all have the same value.
Because if I had a true anywhere in it, the
cycle would mean that the true has to propagate all
the way through.
If there's a false, then it's okay, because false implies
false.
So as soon as I have a cycle, I can
just say all these things have the same value.
And that restricts still further the range of things that
I can count of as valid ways to cut the
diagram in half.
If I take a cut, it must not cut any
cycle in half.
, now, in this particular cycle, I've got a knot.
So what does that mean?
I mean.
I have to make a and not a the same.
You can't make a and not a the same.
So if you see a cycle which has two complementary
things in it, you know that there is no satisfying
assignment for this formula.
So that's the first time in this technique that we've
found a proof that the formula is not satisfiable, which
is a useful thing to know.
So as I said this stuff is not important.
So please don't stress about it.
You don't need to remember it beyond doing the exercises
about it.
But it is quite fun.
And if you do a bit of googling around, you'll
find some slightly related stuff.
There are algorithms that do a similar thing, and there's
some other stuff, so the book has more about it.
I'm choosing not to tell you more of the stuff
in the book, because after all, this is not all
that useful.
It's just a bit of fun.
But sometimes you can get rid of cycles.
And let me summarise what we've done and say a
little bit about the point of tue-sat and introduce one
final piece of complexity.
So what I've said is that if you take a
clause that is in tue-sat form, so every clause has
just two literals in it, we can turn all the
clauses into implications.
We can draw a nice graph, we can define a
notion of valid cut, and that lets us both find
and count satisfying assignments.
Valid cuts had separate zero and one.
They had two separate complementary literals.
And that and they had not to cut a cycle.
, what are the applications of counting two satisfying assignments?
So there's some theoretical stuff which I don't know much
about, but there are applications in statistical physics and allegedly
in artificial intelligence, although I haven't yet found those.
And if you're doing CSS and physics a few.
So at some point you may choose to do statistical
physics.
I don't know whether you have to do you have
to do statistical physics?
No.
Are you going to maybe.
, statistical physics is quite a strange subject because it
applies some quite heavy maths to physics.
But there's a difference in the way physicists do maths
than the way mathematicians do maths.
And sometimes this causes some friction.
.
There's one complication that I haven't mentioned about.
And if any of you feel inclined to play around
with this, then you will have to go and look
at the book.
I have only given you graphs that I can draw
on a flat piece of paper without crossing planar graphs.
, there are graphs which you cannot draw on a
flat piece of paper.
How would you deal with it?
Well, there are ways, but the book will let you
deal with that.
And I think this is quite enough about the arrow
rule.
It is rather cute.
It's a bit of fun.
There is one little exercise on the tutorial for you
to do some arrow counting, but it should not be
too challenging.
So what happens next?
Well, we've been moving slowly from looking just at logic
to doing computational things with logic.
And the next step is to do some computational things
without thinking about logic.
Although a true logician will say that everything is logic.
So I may be doing computation in the next couple
of weeks, but it's just logic in disguise.
But we'll look at it as computation and I give
you two minutes back.
Any final questions?
Piazza is there.
, hopefully the tutorial will be relatively painless.
Next one after this will be slightly less painless, I'm
afraid.
But I have to make you work.
Sometimes.