Let's try now.
Okay, I've taken the mic off mute, so it should
be working a bit better.
All right.
Don is not introducing me, so I'll introduce myself.
I'm Phil Wadler.
I'm a professor at the University of Edinburgh.
Some of you would have seen the lectures I gave
last week.
How many people were here for those lectures?
And who wasn't here for those, but is here now.
And who didn't raise their hand either of those times?
Right.
Okay.
So today we're going to talk about propositions of types.
, as you'll know, I had my hip replaced recently.
So most of the time I'm just going to be,
, sitting this, but maybe I will get up
and wander around.
We will see.
Are there any questions before I start?
So if I say something you don't understand, you have
a job, which is to raise your hand and ask
a question.
Okay.
We'll see how that works.
Right?
So who wants to learn the hilarious story of computability
theory?
So algorithms go back quite a ways.
There was Euclid's algorithm about 300 years BCE, and algorithms
are named for al-Khwarizmi, who came up with a few
and lived around 800 in the Christian era.
But we didn't have a formal definition of algorithm until
the early 1900s.
So around 1935, three papers come out at once Alonzo
Church's Lambda Calculus, which you now all know a bit
about.
Kurt Girdles recursive functions and Alan Turing's Turing machines.
How many people have heard of Alan Turing?
Most of you.
Very good.
So we're going to learn a little bit about the
story.
But, you know, it's a bit buses.
You wait around 2000 years for a definition of algorithm,
and then three come along at once.
Why did this happen?
So it all goes back to David Hilbert.
He wanted what we all want, which is to put
all mathematicians out of business.
So he was, among other things, a logician, one of
the first formal logicians.
And he wrote about the entire problem, which just means
decision problem.
But it sounds much better in German.
And what that was was the idea that you should
be able to write out a formula in logic, and
then have an algorithm that determines whether you've just made
a true statement or a false statement.
So you wouldn't need people anymore to decide what was
true or false.
You could have a computer decide it.
So.
Hilbert puts this forward, and then along comes Kurt Gödel
And girdle comes up with his incompleteness theorem.
So what the incompleteness theorem says is basically what he
showed is that you could formalise in arithmetic.
So first he showed you could take any string of
symbols and encode it as a number.
So properties of strings of symbols could actually be properties
of numbers.
And then he wrote down a property of numbers saying
, this number denotes a valid formula.
And even you give it two numbers and it says
the first number denotes a valid proof of the second
number, which is a valid formula.
So you could just have a statement about numbers that
says this statement is approved.
And it turns out that you could set it up
so that the statement itself had a number, and that
number was the number that it was the proof of.
In other words, he showed how you could write a
statement saying, this statement is you could do it for
this statement is provable, but it's more interesting.
You could also do it to say this statement is
not provable.
So you'd have a statement saying there is no number
that is a proof of this formula.
And that formula would itself have a number.
And that was the number that appeared in the formula.
Mhm.
So as soon as you can do this you're in
trouble.
Right.
Because consider the statement.
This statement is not provable.
Well there are only two possibilities.
Right.
It is provable or it's not provable.
Which is it.
Well if it's provable it says it's not provable.
So if it's provable you've proved something that's false.
So if you know anything about logic.
You know, that's a really bad idea.
You do not want to be able to prove things
that are false.
So assuming your logic is sound, meaning that everything that
you can prove in it is true.
What follows?
Well, what follows is the other one must hold, which
is, .
It's not provable.
Oh, but it says it's not provable.
So it's true.
So you've got two possibilities.
Your logic is unsound.
Really, really bad.
Or your logic is incomplete.
There are true things that you cannot prove.
So that's not nearly as bad as being unsound, but
it's still really, really annoying.
So as soon as this happened, people began to take.
stake.
Let's go back for a minute.
As soon as it happened, people began to think, oh,
well, maybe there is no algorithm that could determine whether
anything was true or false, because what they sort of
had in mind is you just look at all possible
proofs and eventually you'd find the right one.
But now there was a possibility that was true, but
there was no proof.
So now they're beginning to think, hmm, maybe you can't
decide this.
So the race was on, right?
What they wanted to do was to show that there
was no algorithm that could determine whether a given thing
was true or false, or even provable or not provable,
which we've now learned is not quite the same thing.
So the race was on, and as long as you
were looking for an algorithm, you didn't really need a
definition of algorithm.
You just write it down and it would be just
Justice Stewart's definition of pornography, which was I know
it when I see it.
So you look at the algorithm and go, yeah, that's
an algorithm.
But as soon as you want to say there's no
possible algorithm, then you need a formal definition of algorithm.
So you know exactly what an algorithm is.
And you can say nope, there's nothing that does that.
So the race was on.
The first to come up with the definition was Alonzo
Church.
So he was a logician.
He was not a movie star despite what he looked
.
And church came up with ta da, the lambda calculus.
And he came up with this way of encoding numbers
as lambda terms, which I believe you've covered a bit
in class.
This is called church numerals.
And it just says, well, the number one takes a
function and a thingy and applies the function to the
thing he wants.
The number two you take a function and a thingy
and you apply the function to the thingy twice.
Number three you take a function and a thingy and
you apply the function three times and so on.
So you have this encoding of numbers, and they show
that using that encoding of numbers you could.
By the way this would be much easier if you
included zero.
But he didn't.
But he still made it work.
These days we include zero as a natural number as
well.
Anyhow, he had the encoding he showed.
It was very easy to define things plus and
times with an awful lot of work.
His, , PhD student Stephen Carlini showed that you could
define minus one, which was the really hard one.
, cleaning actually discovered this when he went to the
dentist.
When they put him under with laughing gas, he suddenly
had a vision of how to define the subtract one
function and went back to church and said this.
And church said, oh well, I'm glad you figured that
out because I was about to give up on this
lambda calculus stuff.
So now they have lambda calculus, and once they could
do all these things, they said, you know, you could
just do anything with this.
So all of the encodings that girdle did, you could
redo in lambda calculus.
And once they had a formal definition of what it
meant to compute something, they could easily show.
Well, there are some things you could define but not
compute.
And the first of these was the halting problem given
a lambda term itself, is there another lambda term that
decides if that has a normal form or doesn't have
a normal form?
So they were working with untyped lambda calculus rather than
typed lambda calculus, but the ideas are very similar and
write Lambda calculus is extremely simple.
It's the world's simplest programming language.
This is defined right before there were computers.
I referred to computer before, but computer back then meant,
, a person, usually a woman, who would sit at
an adding machine and follow the rules that were given.
So computers were actually people.
, but again, you could solve a computer that would
follow an algorithm.
And this is the world's simplest programming language.
, back before we had electronic computers, it just has
variables, lambda abstractions.
So this stands for a function, right?
, take an argument x and then substitute that in
n and then compute n.
So if n was x times x then this would
be the function that squares things.
And then if you took the if L was lambda
x times x and m was three, then it would
reduce to three times 3 or 9.
So this is application.
This is defined a function.
This is a variable that was all you needed.
So this goes back to 1932.
It's the world's simplest programming language, right?
Any programming language you learn now, even Haskell, right, is
just way more complicated.
Just pages and pages and pages of definition, not three
lines.
So.
Right.
Java is another programming language.
How many people have heard of Java?
Yeah, most of you have.
It's quite widely known.
So this is Duke, the mascot for Java.
And in about a decade or so after Java first
came out, they added lambda expressions to Java.
I knew some of the people who were working on
this at the time, but basically what I is,
you know, this is early 2000.
Look at how smug Duke looks about coming up with
something that was defined in the 1930s.
All right.
So congratulations, Duke.
You caught up with what happened 70 years ago.
So then along comes Kurt Girdle.
And he goes.
He goes to visit church, who's at Princeton, at the
Institute for Advanced Studies.
And he looks at this lambda calculus thing, and he
says the same thing that most people say today when
they see lambda calculus, which is I don't understand that.
That's crazy.
That can't be right.
And he said, and so church said, fine, you come
up with your own way of doing it.
And girdle did.
He came up with recursive functions, which is what we
use in Haskell all the time now, just a function
that's defined on itself, acting on a smaller argument.
So he had recursive functions over numbers, but you can
do recursive functions over arbitrary data types.
But just numbers was enough to capture the idea of
computability.
And so he said, this is what we should use.
And again, church's student Carlini, who I mentioned before, wrote
this down and published it with attribution.
, so it was first presented as a series of
lectures at Princeton, and he wrote it down, and then
cleaning and church went off, and they showed that everything
that you could do with lambda calculus, you could do
with recursive functions, and that everything you could do with
recursive functions, you could do lambda calculus.
So they were equivalent.
So they went back to girdle and said, look, you
didn't our idea, but your idea is the same.
The tension was unbearable.
So girdle thinks about this for a while and they
says, hmm, my definition is the same as your official
inner definition.
Hmm.
Mine must be wrong then.
He just really didn't lambda calculus.
So then along comes Alan Turing, who looks, as you
can see, very young.
He was actually a undergraduate at the time he did
this.
So if you guys are thinking of something to do
for your final year project, here's something to compete with.
You could do the equivalent of defining Turing machines.
So, , I'm exaggerating slightly.
He wasn't an undergraduate.
He had just finished his, , undergraduate degree at Cambridge
when he published this paper.
But he was he was basically an undergraduate.
He hadn't gone to graduate school yet.
And he publishes this paper defining Turing machines, a third
way of doing arbitrary computations.
But he did something that church did not do and
the girdle did not do.
He gave an argument.
why what a computer could do.
Remember computers?
A person sitting and following an algorithm.
What a computer could do is what a Turing machine
could do.
And he said things , okay, we'll have squares which
act as memory because, you know, whoever is doing this
can write things down in each square.
You can write a finite number of things, he explains.
Well, why is it a finite number of things rather
than an infinite number of things?
Well, if, you know, I don't have out there, ,
he explained this very well.
He said, well, consider the numbers 99999999999999, and the number
99999999999.
You might not have noticed, but one of those had
14 nines and one had 15 nines.
And he said, look, you can't distinguish these at a
glance.
There's only a small number of things you can distinguish.
It can't be an arbitrary, unbounded number of things.
It's a small fixed number of things.
So we'll take a finite number of symbols.
You can write in each square of the Turing machine.
And he went on and so he explained why what
a Turing machine could do is what a computer could
do.
And then he sketched, .
So they were very excited about this.
And then they discovered that they had been scooped by
church and scooped by, , girdle.
So they were a bit upset about this, but, ,
Turing's supervisor wrote to these guys and he said, well,
what do you think?
And they said, oh no, that's enough different that that's
worth publishing to.
So they published it, referencing the other two papers and
sketching the proof that what a Turing machine could do
is the same as what lambda calculus could do, or
what recursive functions could do.
And at that point, Turing actually went off to be
a PhD student with church, and, , did extensions, various
extensions of Turing machines, , and also wrote out the
detailed description of how Turing Machine could do what a
lambda term could do and vice versa.
And what I love is the.
There are many people who don't lambda calculus.
They prefer Turing machines.
But what Turing himself said at the beginning of his
paper, maybe he was just buttering up his supervisor, but
I don't think he was the sort of guy who
would do that.
He was gay back when it was not accepted to
be gay.
But, you know, he was not in the closet.
, he was pretty clear about who he was, even
though it was much more dangerous to do that back
then.
By the way, has anybody seen the film The Imitation
Game?
Right.
Where they imply that because he was in the closet,
he would just, , accede to blackmail by Germans and
basically be a traitor to his country?
Not everything you see in a movie from Hollywood is
quite true.
Anyhow, he wasn't the kind of guy who would butter
up his supervisor, but what he said in the very
first paragraph of this paper, he says, look, okay, we're
going to show lambda machine, , lambda terms and Turing
machines are equivalent, and therefore 1st May use the more
elegant I quote Turing lambda terms.
So he actually thought lambda terms Lambda calculus was more
elegant than Turing machines, unlike many people who came after
him who preferred this very mechanical view.
Anyway, when all this happened.
Now, there was the third thing with an argument why
it was what a computer could do.
And finally girdle was convinced and gave into this.
So philosophers to debate whether mathematics is invented or
discovered.
And what I want to claim is when you have
a hat trick, when you have three completely different definitions
that turn out to be of the same thing.
The reason they turn out to be the same thing.
It's not that these three people have very little imagination
and all invent exactly the same thing.
It's because there's the same thing out there.
It has been discovered.
So what do we learn from this?
Right?
Girdle was 28 when he basically undermined the life work
of Hilbert, who was 68.
Turing was 23 when he settled this raging argument between
church, who is 33, and girdle, who was by then
no longer to be trusted 30.
What should you take away from this?
You have an important job.
It's your job to keep explaining to your elders
me, when we've got it wrong.
Right.
So keep that in mind.
It's your job to be setting us straight.
Okay, so that's the preface.
You now know about computability theory.
Now let me tell you a little bit about propositions
as types.
So here's Gerhard Jensen.
, he was also working in the 1930s, just
Hilbert and Church and Girdle and Turing.
And in his not his undergraduate work, but in his
PhD thesis, he defined the not one but the two
main forms of logic that we use today.
And how many people have seen the upside down a
that means for.
All right.
So they had that informal logic since the very late
1800s, early 1900s, but that was written by them as
an just open and closed parenthesis.
There wasn't a special symbol for it.
So, , Jensen thought, oh, it'd be nice to have
a special symbol.
So he introduced the upside down A to stand for
for all.
So here are his rules for one of these major
systems.
Natural deduction.
That's written a bit small.
So here are the same rules written larger I've only
written some of them.
I've written the rules for and introduction and and elimination
given here.
And the rules for implication introduction and implication elimination given
here.
I've written down the rules identically.
There's only one difference between the way he wrote them
and the way I wrote them, which is he wrote
his letters in German, and I'm writing my letters in
English.
So let's go through these rules.
So the most important thing is that unlike the earlier
formalisation of logic, such as those done by Hilbert.
His rules come in pairs and the pairs have a
very important structuring principle.
They are introduces and eliminators.
So introduction means, as you read the rule from top
to bottom.
That symbol gets introduced, right?
The symbol appears below the line, but not above.
Here again eliminators.
As you read from top to bottom, the symbol appears
above but not below.
So what does this rule say?
So you have hypotheses above the line and a conclusion
below.
So this says if a implies b.
So this backwards c it's basically c.
For consequence a implies b.
If we know that and we know A, what can
we conclude when we know A, we know A implies
B, so we know B, right?
That's a rule of logic that you've seen in this
class.
, how do you get.
So that's how you use an application.
How do you get an implication?
You say, well, let's assume A is true.
I don't have a proof of that, but let me
just assume A is true.
And if assuming A is true, I can prove B,
then I know that with no assumptions A implies B,
so these square brackets mean I'm assuming a.
And then this label x says I am discharging this
assumption.
So here I'm assuming A, I prove b and here
with no assumptions whatsoever I conclude a implies b.
All right.
And then conjunction written ampersand is even easier if I
have a proof of a and I have a proof
of B, I can conclude that are both a and
B, and if I know A and B, what can
I conclude?
What can I do with it?
Well, if I know A and B, I must know
A and I must know B, so you can introduce
an.
And when you know both A and B, and when
you've gotten and you can forget one half of it
and conclude the other half.
Any questions about those?
Is that clear enough?
Are you all bored?
Not bored.
Okay.
.
Right.
Remember, it's your job to ask questions.
Right.
So let's make use of that.
Let's do a little proof.
I'm going to show you that b and a implies
a and b.
Wow.
That's completely obvious right?
Why would you even bother to prove that?
Well, the reason I want to bother to prove it
is if our rules work, they should let us prove
this.
So let's check that.
That's so.
And it'll give us a simple example of how these
rules work.
Okay.
So I'm going to assume I want to approve an
implication.
So I start by assuming the thing that is the
argument.
The hypothesis of the implication.
So let's assume B and A.
I'm going to use that assumption twice.
And from B and a of course I can conclude
a and from b and a I can conclude b.
Well now I've got a proof of a and a
proof of b.
So I've got a proof of a and b and
I discharge my assumption, I've got b and a implies
a and B.
Any questions yet.
Now the important thing about about rules coming in pairs
is it means you can eliminate certain pairs.
So if I have an introduction and then I eliminate
I never needed to do that introduction okay.
So instead of saying assume a prove b then I
know a implies B and then give a proof of
A, and I can conclude B.
What would be a simpler way of coming to the
same conclusion?
I've got this part written with three dots and this
part with three dots.
How can I just use those without doing this?
Well, I've got a proof of a right.
So instead of assuming a why don't I just use
the proof of a.
So I'm going to simplify the proof so that instead
of assuming A and getting that to b, b I've
got a proof of a, and from that I get
b.
Now this looks I made the proof smaller, but
in fact I might have made it very much larger
because as we saw here, you might use your assumption
more than once.
So here I've used the assumption twice.
So if my proof here of a is very big,
I might duplicate it two times or even an arbitrary
number of times, so the proof would actually get much
bigger.
Oh, let's skip that.
Okay, let's do another example.
Right.
Let's have got the introduction rule for conjunction.
And then one of the elimination rules.
So here from A and B I can conclude a
and b.
And then from the a and b I can conclude
a right.
What's a simpler way of doing that one.
It's fairly obvious right.
What's the simple way of doing this?
Proof.
You're sitting all by yourself in the middle of the
front row of the second tier.
What?
What's the way of doing this proof directly?
Yeah.
Right.
We've got dot dot, dot ace.
That's a much simpler way of proving a so we
can just.
Right.
Just use dot dot dot A directly.
Okay.
So let's now we know how to simplify proofs.
Here's our little proof that from B and A we
can conclude a and b.
Here's a proof of B.
Here's a proof of A.
Here's a proof of B and a.
So by elimination , I know b and a implies
a and b I know b and a, so I
can conclude a and b, so right.
But there's a lot of guff here that should be
able to get rid of.
Right.
Because here's, , a introducer followed by an eliminator so
I can get rid of that.
So what I do is I take my direct proof
of B and A and copy it in place of
those two assumptions.
And now I've got to do this.
And then once I've done that copy, I have an
an introduction above and an and elimination so I can
get rid of both of those.
And now for my proof of being, my proof of
a I've got a direct proof of A and B
rather than an indirect proof.
Okay.
So Jensen was very interested in these pairs of things
because he wanted to show that you could always simplify
proofs.
You want to show that there were no roundabout proofs.
So he introduced sequent calculus, which is different than this.
This is called natural deduction and showed that you could
always eliminate these pairs, except in sequent calculus they're left
right pairs.
You guys have seen sequent calculus right.
You've not seen natural deduction so much Right.
Natural deduction is the one everybody else uses.
But sequent calculus is nice because it's very symmetric, and
because it was easier for him to prove this elimination
property.
So you define natural deduction to find sequent calculus proved
that they were equivalent.
And then prove that you could always get rid of
these roundabout proofs in sequent calculus.
Great irony.
He needed a roundabout proof to show there are no
roundabout proofs.
So this one that I showed you here actually didn't
come about until.
So he did that in the 1935, in the early
1960s, I think.
This will horrify you.
Roundabout.
When I was born.
Province wrote down the direct proof for natural deduction.
Okay, so that's Jensen.
Now let's look in more detail at what church did.
So church actually came up with lambda calculus.
He wasn't trying to solve the problem of computability.
That just happened on the side.
What lambda calculus was really for was to have a
compact way of doing what was important, which was writing
down formal proofs and logic.
Except it turned out that in untyped lambda calculus, you
could write things, , that would let you prove false,
which is bad, right?
You should not have a proof of false.
So, so it was , oh, dear.
You know, well, we can use lambda calculus for computation.
Okay.
, oh, by the way, church sort of anticipated that.
So he wrote this first paper on lambda calculus, ,
as a compact way of writing down proofs and logic.
But somewhere in the introduction he wrote, it may even
have applications beyond its use in logic.
So he understood that he had something interesting there, but
he wanted it for logic.
And it turned out you could write down these basically
infinite terms that let you then do proofs of false,
which you really didn't want to have.
So after inventing untyped lambda calculus, he invented ta da!
Simply typed lambda calculus and simply typed lambda calculus made
use of an idea that Russell had come up with
to avoid other paradoxes Russell's paradox.
And so he wrote this down in 1940.
So I'm going to show you the simply typed lambda
calculus, which had the property that all terms terminated.
You didn't get these infinite terms, and you could no
longer do a proof of false.
So simply type lambda calculus was suitable as a basis
for logic.
And we will learn a little bit more about just
how suitable it was.
Okay.
So simply type lambda calculus right?
We have application.
If L is a function from A to B and
m is a term of type A, then L applied
to m.
Well this is a function from A to b, so
the result will be a b right.
You use this in Haskell all the time, except you
write this funny thing as an arrow, right?
If x is a term of type A, and I
can write a term n of type b, then I
can write lambda x n.
So here x is free in n.
Here its bound in n, and this will be a
function from an argument of type a to a result
of type b.
If m is a term of type A, and n
is a term of type B, we can form an
m pair, which is an a b pair.
So we write.
In Haskell, we write m in pairs.
Just this.
We also write the type A and B just as
a and b a comma B in parentheses.
If L is an ab pair, then pi one of
L will have type A.
We call this first in Haskell FSG.
And if L is an AB pair then pi two
of L we call this snd.
Second in Haskell we'll have type B.
Is that clear enough.
Any question.
Just not this.
You could go oh yeah I've seen that in a
Haskell before.
Some of you are nodding.
Some of you are asleep.
All right.
We'll move on.
Okay.
So now we can write a little program.
I'm going to write the program that just swaps the,
, elements in a pair.
So this takes a pair, , Z, which is a
B and a pair.
So be first followed by an a, and I'll compute
pi two of z.
So that's the second component that would have type a
and pi one of z.
That's the first component that will have type B, so
this returns a pair with the first components in A
and the second composed of b.
So that's an a b pair.
And you can see right I just explained all that
here.
But we can see the details right.
If z is a b a pair pi two of
z is an a pi one of z is a
b.
I can form pi two of z paired with pi
one of z.
That's an a and b, and I can discharge the
assumption.
So it's lambda z pi two z pi one,
z is a b, and a goes to a and
b function.
It just swaps things around.
Okay.
We can evaluate programs, right.
So , in Haskell we use lazy evaluation which essentially
says substitute term m for every occurrence of variable z.
So if we've got lambda z n applied to m,
why does I copy out n And with every occurrence
of Z replaced by M.
So we'll just take that variable z of type A
and replace it by the term m of type A.
And so now we've got n with every occurrence of
z replaced by m which has type b.
So notice this shows us that as we evaluate a
term it keeps the same type.
It started to type B.
It ends up at type B.
And similarly if I've got m and n form
a tuple m n a pair m n and I
project out the first component, what will that evaluate to?
I'm going to pick on the same person.
What will that evaluate to m right.
It'll just evaluate to m.
So we pick out the first component and Ms. type
A.
This has type A.
And when we're done.
It just evaluates to M, which has type A.
, and in fact, , because you're always getting rid
of some things.
Right.
This is what we showed is that the type stays
the same.
So as you evaluate a type program, you still have
a type program.
And as you evaluate the type program, the types are
getting smaller.
Right.
We saw that the program might get bigger.
Right.
You might copy em many times, but the set of
type distinct types in the program is getting smaller because
before we had A implies B as one.
If you look at the multiset of types, this is
one of the multiset of types that appears in the
program before.
But after we've reduced, that's gotten rid, that's gone from
the multiset of types.
And the multiset of types that appears in the program
is finite.
So it must always be getting smaller.
So programs must terminate.
So that argument was first written down by Alan Turing.
, and in fact, it's that property that guarantees that
simply type lambda calculus is a good way of formulating,
, it can be used as a meta language for
logic, but we'll see.
It's closer to logic than that.
, so now, right, we can look at evaluating a
program which we know is guaranteed to terminate.
And.
Right.
So here is our swap program applied to a tuple
and followed by M.
So if we evaluate this right we take NM and
we replace z by NMN.
So now we've got this.
And now when we take pi two of an NMN
pair will get m and we take pi one we
get n.
So the program.
So swap apply to an NM pair.
Returns an min pair.
So we've swapped the components we started with NM and
we get back min.
So this second thing I showed you might have looked
a little bit similar to the first thing I showed
you.
Right.
And in fact it's let's see it's exactly identical.
Right.
So I'm not sure if facilities has said time
to do this.
Dawn, did you talk to them in time?
So.
Well, I'm sorry.
What was supposed to happen is that you could reach
under your seat and pull out a pair of rose
coloured glasses.
So I want you to pretend that you're wearing rose
coloured glasses.
Of course, if you're wearing rose coloured glasses, you won't
see all this stuff in red.
it will vanish and you'll just be left with the
blue.
And indeed, if you take this set of slides with
everything in red and blue and compare it to what
we had here, it's the same, right?
All the blue stuff here got augmented into red and
blue stuff here.
And what does that mean?
What that means is all this stuff in red is
basically writing out in a term form, the proof this
term, right written out here linearly stands for this whole
tree.
That is the proof of A and b.
And in general the red stuff the terms is just
another notation for proofs.
You can think of the proofs as proof trees or
parse trees of terms or just as terms.
So we've got this very strong correspondence where the blue
stuff in logic is formulas of the logic, propositions, statements
that can be true or false.
And the red stuff is proofs.
So, , a formula in logic corresponds to a type
in a type programming language simply type lambda calculus
or Haskell.
A.
Proof in the logic corresponds to a term in the
programming language.
And most importantly, right.
There's a lot of structure preserved here because simplifying a
proof corresponds to evaluating a program.
So we have propositions as types, proofs as programs, and
simplification of proofs as normalisation of programs.
Evaluating a program.
Mhm.
So this is sometimes called the Cory Howard isomorphism.
and write for programming languages with types.
We often write out arrow times plus and bottom.
But in logic the corresponding things are implies which we
wrote that way and which we wrote as an ampersand,
by the way.
Right.
People often do it with this and this, but this
is horrible, right?
You stand on your head and you can't tell what's
going on, but you can very easily confuse and and
ors.
, so it's much better in fact.
Right.
Ampersand for this one and or for this one.
And, , Jensen knew that.
But we seem to have forgotten it these days.
But in fact, ampersand for this one and the wed,
the V symbol for that one is a good choice,
just as a matter of design that makes it easy
for people to read.
, so anyhow, this corresponds to , wedge or ampersand.
This corresponds to V and this corresponds to false.
And it's called the Cary Howard correspondence, because a variant
of it was discovered by Haskell Curry, the same person
that Haskell is named after, and the same person.
The currying is named after, , in the 1930s, William
Howard, much later in the 1970s, wrote this out first
for simply typed lambda calculus.
Just what I've shown you, and then said, well, what
happens with the rest of logic?
Is there also a programming language that corresponds to the
rest of logic?
And he discovered what's called dependent types.
And dependent types are important because they show up in
what, , lots of proof assistance that we use today.
So, , this was published in 1980, but he actually
discovered it in the early 1970s and then published it
in 1980.
In a festschrift devoted to, , Haskell Curry on his
80th birthday.
So.
Right, we've got the Curry Howard correspondence, propositions as types,
proofs as programs, and normalisation of proofs as evaluation of
programs.
And the interesting thing is, the first time I saw
this, I thought, oh, that's just a cute little trick.
But it turns out it applies not just to natural
deduction and simply type lambda calculus.
But the same thing works for polymorphic types we
have in Haskell.
The Hindley Miller type system, which was in fact discovered
once by the logician Hindley and once by the computer
scientist Milner.
There's a more general system called system F, which again
was discovered once by a logician and once by a
computer scientist.
Basically, what this says is it's a double barrelled name,
Curry Howard, which predicts the existence of other double barrelled
names.
It says every good idea will be discovered twice, once
by a logician and once by a computer scientist, because
they're doing the exact same thing.
And it turns out that pretty much every interesting logic
has an interesting corresponding programming language, and vice versa.
, there's sort of a very important exception to this,
which is concurrent programming.
There are lots of processed algebras for doing concurrent programming,
but nobody knows which one corresponds really neatly to a
logic yet.
There's a lot of work on what's called session types
and linear logic, which may be a form of the
answer, but I think the actual answer is something that
maybe somebody here will discover one day.
So right, there are lots of functional languages.
You've learned Haskell, but there are many, many others, and
there are lots of proof assistants.
So , the first two were auto math and type
theory done by Matt and Love, based on write in
1975.
I told you Howard did his work in the early
1970s.
He showed it to Matt and Luff, and then Matt
and Luff came up with type theory.
So this is a way of saying, this is the
way we should think of proofs as terms and the
appropriate dependently typed programming language.
And then there were many, many other proofs systems that
came since one of the important ones was MGL, LCF,
which was done here at Edinburgh by Robin Milner.
He used to be a professor.
I hold the chair he used to sit in.
That was why I came here.
I couldn't turn down being offered that chair.
And MLK, of course, part of that is ML, which
is one of the early functional programming languages.
It was the first one that was tight.
And then Haskell came along because we were we were
all in Glasgow at the time, or most of us
were.
And we looked across what was going on here in
Edinburgh and we said, oh, that type system is neat.
Let's do a lazy, functional language that has that type
system.
Right.
So one of the important things, right, if you have
a good idea, other people will pick up and use
that good idea.
The the trick is to make your idea simple enough
that other people can understand it and pick it up
and use it.
So I'm going to conclude with just two minutes with
I normally stay away from philosophy.
But we saw philosophy was very important to Turing getting
his work accepted.
So I'm just going to do a tiny bit of
philosophy.
So, right.
Sometimes we want to talk to aliens, right.
We've actually done this.
So this is the the Voyager.
This is a plaque that appears on the Voyager satellite.
And this shows you where Voyager went.
Right.
There's the sun, there's a Venus, sorry, Mercury and Venus
and Earth, and it left Earth and swings around the
sun and Jupiter in between Jupiter and Saturn, and then
leaves the solar system.
So in case any aliens find it, hopefully they can
look at this and work out what's going on.
This is showing a bunch of quasars, and they're the
frequency in which hydrogen, , vibrates when you look at
these different quasars.
And then the length of the line is the distance
from those quasars to sol to where this satellite originated
from.
And then there are pictures of people on it.
Now, depending on the aliens that see this right, they
may look at this and go, , right.
They'll probably work out.
Length of a line means distance.
These are written in binary.
They can probably work out that binary means numbers.
Maybe they can work out the schematic of the solar
system.
They'll look at this and either go, that's a bunch
of weird lines, or maybe they'll look right.
If Star Trek is right, they'll look at it and
go, oh, they're just us.
Except they don't have pubic hair.
Okay, so if we talk to aliens, right, they might
understand.
They might understand some of it.
They might not understand all of it.
Right.
Length of a line, probably understand drawing.
Maybe they'll understand.
Maybe not in how many people have seen the.
It's quite old now Independence Day.
So in this they, , , destroy all the aliens
by giving them a virus.
The virus is written in C.
Well, actually, Java had come out then, but I'm pretty
sure it wasn't in Java because Java had not yet
spread through the known universe.
But they give they send them a virus written in
C that then destroys the aliens.
If we sent aliens something written in C, would they
even be able to figure out what it means?
Right?
Maybe it would be length of lines, but more
likely it's this, right?
It's , what is this stuff?
All right.
So if we sent them something written in C, they
probably wouldn't understand it.
But what if we sent them something written in lambda
calculus?
Would they understand that?
So should we call lambda calculus the universal programming language
because it's something that aliens would understand.
Well, these days, I first gave this talk, I had
to explain what multiverses are.
Now, you've all seen the Marvel films.
You know what multiverses are.
And right, scientists actually talk about this.
It's , it turns out that the different forces in
our universe, the weak electromagnetic force, is just strong
enough to keep matter together.
If it was a little stronger, everything would collapse.
You wouldn't have atoms.
It's a little bit weaker.
The electrons would fly away.
You wouldn't have atoms.
So they say, well, why is it that the force
is exactly right for matter to exist?
They say, well, it's because we're here to see it.
There are other universes where it's stronger or weaker, but
we're not there to see it in our universe.
We're there to see it.
It's just right to have matter.
So scientists actually reason about multiverses a bit.
Now, in a multiverse, you might have different weak electromagnetic
force.
You might have, , different strength of gravity.
Right?
Different gravitational constant.
One thing I think you will not have different is
the laws of logic.
Right.
Logic goes beyond the universe.
It goes across multiverses.
Maybe there are multiverses with different logic, but my imagination
is not great enough to consult them.
So what does that mean?
That means we cannot call lambda calculus the universal programming
language.
Why can we not call it the universal programming language?
Because doing so is too limiting.
So I will stop there.
I just want to leave you with one thought, right?
You've learned about Haskell, which is very practical language, but
one thing that makes it work so well is that
it's based on lambda calculus, which, as we've seen, is
very simple.
, something that was basically independently discovered three times because
computation was discovered three times, and lambda calculus is a
model of computation.
And what I want you to go away with is
the thought that if you have a tough job to
do, you should think that this is a job for
lambda calculus.
I will stop there.
Thank you very much.
So.