Okay.
Good afternoon.
First question is, can you hear me through this?
Yep.
Okay.
So last time last week, we talked about syllogisms and
checking that syllogisms are valid.
And we looked at three forms of reasoning that we
can use to get from one sequence sequent from one
categorical statement to another.
We had the rule of double negation, which says that
if you know that A is true, then you know
that not not A is true.
And the other way round, we had our fundamental syllogism,
Barbara, which says that if A entails B and b
entails C, then A entails C.
And I think early on we agreed that that was
a pretty obvious piece of sound reasoning.
And then towards the end we talked about composition.
If you know that A entails B, then you know
that not B entails not A.
So this is the basis of proof by contradiction.
This works both ways round.
So if you know this, you know that if you
know this, you know that well, you put up a
few diagrams to illustrate it at the end, but you
can just look at it by a simple reasoning.
Any questions about what we looked at last week?
Or absorbed it.
Okay.
So what we're going to do this week is go
on and look at the other syllogisms that Aristotle came
up with, some of which we agree with as modern
people and some of which we don't.
And so we'll discuss that at the end of the
week.
And then we will also talk a bit more about
negation.
So towards the end of last time, I talked a
little bit about this syllogism involving all snakes or reptiles.
No reptile has fur, so no snake has fur.
And we said that this looks just Barbara.
It has not C instead of C.
So from our point of view where a negated proposition
is negated, predicate is just another predicate.
It's Barbara.
Aristotle didn't see things that name.
So that way.
So it had another name.
So at the moment we have these reasonings and the
idea that a negated predicate is just a predicate.
What happens if we take Barbara and splash negation symbols
everywhere?
That makes sense.
So here's Barbara itself.
Here's what we get by using not a instead of
a.
Here's what we get by using not C instead of
C.
That's what we saw before Here.
I'm using not A instead of A and not C
instead of C, and so on and so on.
So just by exchanging C for not C, a for
not a and b for not b, we have eight
different syllogisms.
From our point of view.
These are all the same because they all have the
same shape as Barbara.
But for Aristotle, these would all have been different.
And in fact, some of them wouldn't even count as
syllogisms at all for Aristotle.
So let's think about it from our point of view.
Do you agree that these are all basically Barbara or
we've done is change?
Yeah.
Thank you.
Anybody not agree?
Anybody think there might be something dodgy about this idea
that we can just change a predicate?
Okay, so that's about 98% not committed.
I'll assume that you will be committed.
So our principal of Barbara said, we have A, B
and C, and you can plug anything at all in
place of A and anything in place of B and
anything in place of C, and it still makes sense.
Now if we go back to Aristotle's time, he didn't
have a modern view of negation, as I've said before.
So he didn't actually think about the idea that not
A was a predicate.
Just A is.
He did think about things A entails, not B,
but he expressed it.
But he saw that as what he called a negative
statement about the positive predicate.
He didn't see it as A entails, not B.
He said it saw it as nothing.
That is, A is B, and you should think a
better.
Make sure that those two things mean the same thing.
So if we look at the eight possibilities here and
take out the ones that involve negations on the left
of predicates.
So here he didn't think about making statements all
not Greeks, , mortal.
, I mean, he could have said such a thing.
He would have said all barbarians immortal, but he didn't
express it as not Greeks.
So if you go back and look at a classic
pre-modern textbook with these eight syllogisms, you won't see any
of the ones that mention a negated predicate on the
left hand side.
So if we get rid of them, that only leaves
the two predicates we've seen already, which in the Middle
Ages were called Barbara and Enchiladas.
So that's the the classic one.
And that's the snakes and reptiles form.
How many more syllogisms could Aristotle come up with?
Well, Aristotle did have the kind of reasoning that we
looked at last time.
So he knew about contra position.
He didn't have it in quite as cleaner form as
we have it, but he did have it.
And so if you use contra position.
You can get another.
Three universal syllogisms.
So what we've got here is starting from the snake
and reptile one here.
I've done con for position.
B entails not C contra position is swap and negate.
So if I swap swap c and B and negate
them I get C and not be.
Here I've done a contra position on A and not
C swap.
Negate gives me C and not a, and here I
have done contra position on both of them.
So I've negated that and that.
So.
That gives me five sound syllogisms about universal statements about
all or every statements.
And again, if anybody is curious, these were called Cesaro
mayonnaise and chemistries.
Has anybody gone and looked up the names?
Well done.
You're still saying?
It can be shown.
And I think in one of the tutorials we will
ask you to look at the exercise in the book
that says show that this is true, that these three,
together with the two we've already seen, are the only
universal syllogisms.
That is, statements about syllogisms involving just all statements or
no statements.
So this is a no statement.
No A is C.
Sorry, no C is a And those are all
the syllogisms about universal statements.
So we that's our complete reasoning set for categorical statements.
We'll go on to see more about these syllogisms in
a bit.
But first, any questions about what I did here in
this composition?
We're going to be doing a lot more composition in
a lot more different ways.
So it's going to be important that you get into
your heads what composition is.
Yeah.
Okay.
Maybe it would be a good idea to go through
one of the examples on the board.
So.
Here.
So here's Laurent.
Now, first of all, looking at this as a syllogism
in its own right.
Do you believe it as a piece of reasoning?
Yeah.
So if I entails B and B entails not C,
then and it's not C, it's for us.
It's just Barbara.
But for Aristotle it was different because of the negation.
So what I'm going to do with the first one
here.
Is you'll see that it differs because I've done something
to the B and the C here.
So what have I done.
I must not go over there because it won't show
on the camera.
So try and get that definition into your head.
, it's how I remember it.
Contra position is a fancy Latin word for taking.
If p, then q and turn it into.
If not p, then not q.
And that reasoning those two things imply each other is
what you do when you do a proof by contradiction.
So if I do quantum position.
On this.
I swap.
So I put the two things on the other side.
And I negate them by negating b I get not
b by negating see I get not not see.
And then I use double negation to get to get
that.
Okay.
And similarly with the others.
Okay.
Any other questions?
Comments.
Yeah.
Sorry.
So I could do quantum opposition to any or all
of the three of the premises and conclusion.
, if you go back to the full listing there,
you'll see that you can.
And look at that, you'll see that you have all
possible combinations.
So in some sense, composition is classical mathematical reasoning.
It doesn't change anything because a mathematical theorem that says
if and only if tells you that two things are
the same.
But you might want to think about things in some
particular way.
And sometimes you want to think about something in the
contrapuntal way.
Okay.
Any other questions?
Okay.
I want to go on and talk a little bit
about unsound syllogisms.
We've talked about syllogisms that are sound because we are
interested in formalising good reasoning, but there's an awful lot
of bad reasoning in the world, and so it's often
very helpful to understand when a piece of reasoning is
faulty.
So here is a piece of reasoning.
All snakes are reptiles.
No reptile has fur.
All snakes have fur.
And I hope you agree that this is a pretty
bad piece of reasoning.
Everybody agree that it's a total rubbish?
Anybody not agree that it's total rubbish?
.
Anybody think?
Think of a way in a particular universe in which
my might actually be true.
And the sense is there a universe in which all
snakes have fur?
In which case it wouldn't matter that it's rubbish reasoning.
It's the statement all snakes have fur.
True in this room.
Okay, I'm hearing one answer and see.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So if there were no snakes.
And I really hope there were no snakes in this
room.
And that's one of you has a pet that you
carry around, then all snakes have fur is true.
So it doesn't matter whether the premises are true or
false or not.
But nonetheless, this is still an unsound piece of reasoning
because it only happens to work in that one particular
universe where there were no snakes.
It's not a good general piece of reasoning.
So how can we go about using our graphical technique
to look at it and see that it's an unsound
piece of reasoning?
How do you show that something is rubbish?
You demonstrate by example that it produces nonsense, and nonsense
usually means a contradiction.
So here's our Venn diagram set up.
Remember we were doing this last week.
Here's the diagram for A entails B that says there
is nothing in A that is not also in B.
So this region is empty.
This is the B entails, not C that says the
middle region is empty.
There isn't anything that is both B and C, so
if I plug these diagrams together and do the shading,
I get this.
And then remember what we do is pull out the
b, leaving a and C behind and let the white
paint flow over the boundaries.
So there's what happens when we pull out the b.
And if I now let the white paint flow then.
I have a diagram that looks that.
And that is not the diagram for A entails C.
What is that the diagram for.
A entails not C no snake has firm, which is
what we expect.
So the diagram we got doesn't match the conclusion of
the syllogism.
How do we go further and actually demonstrate it.
We just need to come up with a particular universe
where it's definitely wrong.
And it's wrong if we can find something to put
there.
So if we can come up with a universe which
has something in there, then that bit of the diagram
says there shouldn't be anything in there, so it'll be
okay.
And there are plenty of universes where we can find
an example of a snake that has no fur.
Edinburgh Zoo is the nearest one.
Well, it's the nearest one we know about.
No doubt there are pet snakes kicking around.
Now, I asked you a moment ago, is there a
universe?
Where the syllogism is a valid statement?
And the answer was a universe in which there are
no snakes.
It should be noted that Aristotle would have disagreed with
us.
And we'll come on to why Aristotle disagreed with us.
Again, it's to do with something.
I've already mentioned the existential assumption.
But I thought it would now be useful just to
show how you prove that a syllogism is unsound.
Come up with a universe in which it is definitely
not not that valid.
Okay.
Any questions about this demonstration of a bad piece of
reasoning?
, you don't need to do it graphically.
No.
So we do it graphically.
Fundamentally, we do it graphically because Michael Forman liked graphical
reasoning and it is quite fun.
, I'm not really a graphical reasoner, so I do
it symbolically.
I just say, well, if A entails B and b
entails not C, and I just kind of think about
what combinations of universe will give me a counterexample.
Kind of advantage of this is that it steers you
to looking at the place where you have to put
the X and find an example.
So we look at the mismatch between this diagram and
this diagram.
And we see that there's a mismatch in there.
It's probably unlikely that you're going to do graphical reasoning
in your future careers, but it's quite fun for teaching
to other people, and some of you might go out
and teach stuff.
, an exercise that you might to try.
Try.
Given that there are elections all over the place, or
have been elections all over the place recently, is go
and find some politician making some statement about how something
causes something else, and see if it falls into any
of the obvious categories of rubbish reasoning from a logistic
point of view.
, there is, of course, one candidate in particular in
the elections around the world at the moment, who is
notorious for an inability to reason.
So see if you can find an example.
Okay.
Any other questions about this little example?
Okay.
So what have we done so far?
We have established five depending on how you count universal
syllogisms.
So that is syllogisms about statements of the form.
All A or B or no A is B.
Here they are all listed again.
Notice that these come in more or less equivalent forms.
If you look at this and this.
Then they look different.
But they're effectively the same because they're supposed versions of
each other.
So whether you can't 5 or 7 depends on how
you to count.
And much of this is Aristotle.
So these are the five syllogisms that Aristotle recognised.
And these are variants of them.
If you look at these, which are all sound, then
you will note this observation.
Count how many negations there are in the syllogisms.
And if we look at them, you see everything has
either no negations or two negations, one in a premise
and one in the conclusion, one in the premise, one
in the conclusion.
Same there.
Same there and same there.
So Barbara is the basic one.
It has no negations.
Everything else has one negation in the premise and one
in the conclusion.
On the other hand, if we go back and look
at this unsound syllogism, it has only one negation.
So it's just got one negation here in the premise
positive and positive.
This is actually a general rule.
The sound syllogisms have an even number of negations.
The unsound syllogisms have an odd number of negations, so
that's a quick check to see whether a syllogism makes
sense or not.
Okay.
So let me summarise what we've done both last week
and so far.
We started with our fundamental rule, Barbara, and we applied
the two techniques of contra position and double negation.
And we got five sound syllogisms plus a couple of
variations about universal statements.
So all and no statements.
What is contra position?
Well contra position as I said it's negate and swap.
So we've done it applied to sequence.
So I take a entails B swap.
Negate gives me not B entails not a.
But we can do contra position on things more general
than just sequence.
Anywhere we have some kind of if then statement.
We can do a quantum position.
So if we think about.
Any particular reasoning, rule of reasoning or legal statement, then
we can do quantum position.
Here is a slightly perverse example which was dreamed up
by Michael Forman.
For reasons best known to himself.
I've adapted it a bit to make it slightly more
sensible than it was originally, but this is an example
of quantum position as a piece of legal reasoning, working
out what you're allowed to do.
So.
if you're over 18, I'll.
Curiosity.
How many under 18 do we have here?
Do we have under 18?
Yeah, I was under 18 when I first got to
university.
It was a pain.
So sorry about the under 18.
We're going to forget you for the rest of this
example.
So in Scotland, if you're over 18, you can legally
buy alcohol between ten in the morning and ten in
the evening every day.
Now, if you're in England, this time, restriction doesn't apply.
I could go into a political rant about the Scottish
nanny state, or I could not very hard on people
who are going to work and need to buy a
bottle of wine for the dinner party in the evening.
But Scotland has this restriction.
The original motivation for the restriction is to try to
have some gap in which people can't continue being drunk.
So in our current universe, the following rule of fact
holds if you're in Scotland and the time is between
10 and 10, then you can legally buy alcohol.
Now notice this is a piece of informal reasoning.
I haven't turned it into a piece of formal logic
and specified my universe exactly.
If we were going to do that, we would have
a bit of work to do.
Because who is in Scotland?
What is Scotland anyway?
What is the time frame?
Who is it?
Who's doing legally?
Buying alcohol?
So really my universe here is composed of triples of
a person, a place and a time.
But that's a bit of a pain to think about.
So I just reason in English and forget about it.
But do think about how you would write this down
formally in symbols and what the arguments of your predicates
would be.
Notice this is not a sound rule.
This is not a universally true rule of reasoning.
It's a rule that is true in Scottish law, which
for various reasons is a particular universe that matters to
us.
So suppose I start doing some negation.
Here are a couple of statements that I've done by
doing something or other to this rule.
If I take the first one.
If I'm in Scotland.
And I cannot legally buy alcohol, what do I know?
What can I infer?
Yeah.
Yeah.
It's night time by the very broad Scottish definition of
Night-Time.
And what what's going on here?
So if you look at these two, what I've really
done is composition.
I've looked at this one and this one and I've
swapped them around and negated them.
So here I've done a negation by putting a knot
sign in.
And here I've done a negation by saying, well, I
know that the opposite of between 10 and 22 is
between 22 and 10, which is a fact about how
we represent times.
So again, there's domain knowledge, linguistic knowledge going on in
this piece of reasoning, not just pure logic.
, this relates to a question somebody was asking me
on Piazza, which is is unsuccessful, the same as not
successful.
And in most contexts it is.
, here's the other example.
If it's daytime and I can't legally buy alcohol, what
can I conclude?
Yeah.
Not in Scotland.
There are many places in the world where this is
true.
, not England, of course, but many other places.
So again, this is an example of contra position because
I've started from the basic rule and I have swapped
these two.
Negated by alcohol and negated in Scotland.
So here's an example of composition as something that lets
you manipulate laws.
If you are actually doing legal reasoning, most of you
probably don't do much legal reasoning right now.
But at some point you're going to enter a world
where you have to.
In particular, you're going to have to reason about taxes
and which taxes you have to pay.
And tax law is a fascinating subject because it's really
quite formally written in documents, many hundreds of pages long.
And at some point you do have to start doing
this kind of reasoning to work out whether you owe
tax or not, because people who write tax laws are
extremely fond of things that go this will applies
unless these three things happen and an exception to these
three things happening is and so on.
So the reasoning can be quite subtle and quite expensive
to get wrong.
, and let me pass on to you one piece
of advice from my father.
Never, ever annoy Her Majesty's revenue and Customs, because they
can make your life miserable for so long, in so
many ways that you just don't want to go there.
Slightly less miserable than some other countries.
Revenue departments will make it, but still pretty miserable.
So let's get back.
To a bit of abstraction.
Well, maybe let's first take questions.
Any questions about this as a piece of reasoning?
.
So how is it different?
That's a very good question because you've detected, I think,
what it is that makes me a bit unhappy about
this section of the course, because really we're looking at
kind of propositional statements, aren't we?
We're addressing them up to look rules.
But if I wrote.
I could write them as propositional statements.
.
So it's actually going to become apparent that everything we
do is just something that works at many levels.
So this isn't.
Radically different.
It's just an example of of composition being used with
a different format of premises.
So here I've written Marta's rules in the same way
that we did on the previous slide where I was
negating sequence.
So the main point is that composition is very general
thing.
It applies at all levels of reasoning.
You can do it on simple propositional statements.
P implies q is the same as not q implies
p.
You can do it at the level of sequence A
entails.
B is the same as not B entails not A,
and you can do it at the level of rules
this where you have , p and q and
then r follows.
Then you can do composition across those as well.
The other point of course, is that here we have
two premises and one conclusion, and I can do quantum
position with the conclusion and one premise at a time.
So again, we'll think about that in more detail later.
And the full answer to the question will become apparent
in a week or two.
Yeah.
Can I do a quantum position on the two premises?
No, because contra position is about things that are in
an if then relationship.
And this vertical line is serving the purpose of an
if then statement.
So if I were to do swap and negate on
the two premises, that would amount to negating both the
premises, which is undecided thing to do.
Okay.
So having set up composition as this very useful thing,
let's get back to the more symbolic representation and think
about, , what we can do with Barbara.
, incidentally, how many of you noticed that I'm saying
contra posing instead of contra posing?
Okay.
Who thinks I'm being a pretentious idiot by doing so?
Somebody should.
.
It's a curious thing.
It's essentially because of the way Latin worked.
, the.
If you are following Latin etymology, then the verb ought
to be contra pone.
But then in that case we ought to be saying
or pone instead of oppose and such .
And for bizarre historical reasons, logicians have sometimes decided to
say contraption instead of contra pose.
Maybe because contra pose is something we use as a
normal English word to put two things next to each
other, whereas this is a different use.
So because I quite Latin and because I am
a pretentious get some of the time, I'm continuing to
say contraption, but don't feel you have to if you
find it obnoxious.
So if we take Barbara, then we've got the rules
and tells B, B, and Tlca entail C.
Each of these things is something that can be negated.
So we can take this rule and do composition on
it.
So we can say instead of negating the sequence of
the individual sequent, we swap those about as we did
in the Scottish law example on the previous slide.
Now if I swap and negate to sequence, what is
it I'm negating?
I'm not negating the predicates.
So I'm not adding negations there.
That's something different.
What I'm doing is negating the whole sequence.
So I'm saying here A does not entail C.
Or, to put.
It another way.
, a does not entail C.
What does A does not entail C mean it means
there is a C that is not a.
And I can do that on the left or the
right.
So I could take this conclusion and I could contraption
it with that premise to give that or with that
premise to give that.
.
What do these look ?
In terms of diagrams, we have statements this.
So this is the every a is BA entails B.
What does A does not entail C mean it means
some a is not See, there is an A, there
is not see.
So now we've left the the realm of universal statements.
And we're talking about existential statements, things that assert the
existence of something which we haven't done any reasoning for
so far.
And actually, in much of the time we want to
say that something does exist, something there is something which
is true, which has some nice property.
So here are some questions which we can think about.
I think we can think about them now because I
have a few minutes.
So think about this.
I said I could do contradiction between the conclusion And
one premise.
Or I could do it between that conclusion and that
premise.
What would happen if I did it with both premises?
Would I get something that is sound, or would I
get something that doesn't work?
What would the what would it even mean?
Because I can't swap the premise with both conclusions.
Maybe related question is I've been cheerfully writing all these
syllogisms with two premises.
This one and this one.
Again, somebody asked on Piazza, unfortunately, in a private question,
I think, does it matter which way round the premises
are?
, does it matter which way round I write the
premises.
If I wrote B and tail C and tails B
and tail C, would it matter?
No, I mean they're just premises, right?
Well, they have the same status.
And again, this is something that is true for us
as modern logicians.
But in the classical presentation these two things were distinguished.
So they would talk about a major premise and a
minor premise.
And I can never remember which one is which.
So I think that this is the major premise and
this is the minor premise, but I'm not sure.
And who cares because we have modern logic.
.
If we were allowing ourselves more notational freedom and we
could combine lots of things with logic.
What is the symbol that we would write between these
two premises to express their relation?
And what we're really saying is, if this is true
and this is true, then this is true.
So then I think now we're at a little exercise
for next time.
Go away and think a little about if I started
putting ands in here, what would happen?
Suppose I could combine these with an and we haven't
talked about combining sequence that.
We're going to later week 4 or 5.
But if we could combine these two sequence by saying
A entails B and b entails C.
And that was just one premise.
What would happen if we then did contra position with
the conclusion?
So for those of you who are wanting to stretch
a bit.
Think about that.
See if you can work out what happens next.
Again, we will see you in about two weeks time.
Another thing that you can think about before tomorrow.
I've got an awful lot of different ways of writing
if then statements.
So back in the propositional logic I had a implies
b that was the plain ordinary.
If the moon is made of green cheese, then I
am a banana.
Statement.
Propositional logic.
We have been working with A entails B, and remember
that this is not a simple propositional statement because it
has an implicit quantifier in there.
It says for every x a of x implies b
of x.
And actually we have yet another form of implication because
we have the form of implication that says if the
premises are true, then the conclusion is true.
So we've got at least three different kinds of if
then kicking around.
So have a bit of a think about what the
relationship between them is.
And I think that's a good point to stop for
today.
, don't try to answer these questions now.
They're just something to think about.
They're more philosophical than technical.
Any final questions about today?
Okay.
So I will see you tomorrow and hope that I
can speak a bit better.
Thank you.
This is, by the way, my first ever attack of
Covid.
Managed to escape it for four years.