Okay.
Good afternoon everyone.
So as I said a few times, I think it's
a time to slow down a little bit, take a
breather, because this is essentially a break between a couple
of sections of the course.
So this has been about logic and proof.
And we're going to do one more logical thing next
week part of this week.
and then after that, we move on to thinking about
computation more directly.
What we do next will be a kind of bridge
between them, but we've introduced quite a lot of stuff.
We've introduced logic, , propositional logic.
So logistic logic and we've introduced various ways of proving.
And I haven't been looking at the tutorial marks.
Overall, I think a lot of people are fairly happy
with everything, but not everybody is.
So as I told you, I plan for today to
be basically going back over anything you would me
to go back over and doing any problems or answering
any questions.
And the idea is that we do them, not me.
, so over to you.
What would you me to do?
Yeah.
So the existential assumption is still worrying some people.
How many people are still a bit worried by the
existential assumption?
More and more and more.
A few , so I guess there are a couple
of aspects of it.
Is the UN clarity what it is or why we're
talking about it?
, in particular, I think maybe.
It's probably easiest if I write on the screen, because
then the people online can see more easily, and I
can also state it around.
So one question is.
Then what's the the meaning of universal quantification.
So universal quantification we expect to mean for all x.
But what is x.
So for us x means all x in some universe.
I forget what what kind of symbol did I use
for universes right at the start of the course?
Was it curly letters?
I can't remember.
Let's use curly letters.
That's supposed to be a curly X.
, so we've got some universe, and we make some
statement that for all x.
P of x is true.
And the thing that confuses Fuses many people.
And that leads to the difference between us and Aristotle
is whether the empty universe is legitimate.
Do we allow the empty universe as a sensible thing
to talk about?
So I've been trying to indoctrinate you for five, six
weeks now, five weeks about the right answer to this.
But possibly indoctrination isn't the most reasonable way of doing
things.
So who is completely happy with the idea that it
makes sense to talk about logic in an empty universe?
Okay, who thinks it's definitely a bit odd?
Only one.
So that leaves about 90% of you uncommitted.
So what do you think?
Somebody who didn't raise a hand at all.
What do you think about it?
If I had a better memory, I would point at
one of you, but I don't.
I suppose this gets back or down to a rather
fundamental thing about mathematics.
So making a decision about whether we should talk about
empty universes.
What kind of decision is that?
Is it a mathematical decision forced on us by logic?
Is it, .
Is it a matter of personal preference?
Is it a matter of sociological preference?
Yeah, I guess it's so that we can take into
account Is.
So?
So we can take into account things.
That sounds a kind of pragmatic reason.
Okay.
, so fundamentally, I think what I've been arguing is
that it simply makes life easier.
, so many of you have already programmed in languages
with arrays.
If you programmed in any civilised language with arrays, array
indexes started at zero.
Did you have to get used to that?
Was it surprising?
Yes.
Okay.
Anybody find it completely natural from the beginning?
Yeah.
Did anybody go to a primary school where the way
you counted was 012 at age five?
Possibly.
Places exist 5 or 6.
Seven, depending on which country you first went to school
in.
, so is zero a natural number?
Okay, that's an interesting question.
No it's not.
Okay.
It's not an interesting question.
It's a completely trivial question, but it's a question that
people can still argue about.
So a quick straw poll is zero a natural number,
not natural.
Oh, very few yes's.
Who says no zero is not a natural number?
Okay, this is a binary question.
A number is either a natural number or it isn't.
So there's no excuse for not having answered one way
or the other.
If you really pushed me this, I'm going to
have to get whew clap out.
Except I don't know how to use woo clap yet,
so you're safe.
, you might to know that we use woo
clap in university Senate meetings for taking votes, so I
know how to use it as a customer, but not
as a lecturer.
, so is there a natural number?
It's a matter of definition, right?
And when I say natural number, I mean whatever we
mean by that, that symbol that we use to represent
the natural numbers.
, so if at school, we tend to get taught
that the natural numbers are one, two, three, as soon
as you get into university maths, university pure maths, at
any rate you get told that the natural start at
zero.
, why?
Because it just makes life easier.
It happens to be easier to set up a working,
consistent, logical mathematical universe.
If the first, if the most fundamental thing you can
think of is zero rather than one, but it's not
critically important.
It's kind of the same with this universal quantification.
Can we talk about quantifying over the empty universe?
Well, we can decide that it means something.
And it turns out by the consensus of about 150
years of modern logic, that it's much easier if we
can.
Aristotle was many things.
He was a philosopher, not just a logician.
In fact, logicians as such didn't exist.
So he would have said he was a philosopher.
And for him, the idea of talking about a bunch
of things that don't exist is meaningless.
If we are going to talk about quantification over the
empty universe, then what does it mean?
If we say for every unit, every unicorn has one
horn and there are no unicorns, then should that be
a true statement?
, I argued, yes, but of course that also means
every unicorn has two horns should be a true statement
if there are no unicorns or indeed any other statement.
So there are interesting questions there about dealing with counterfactual
worlds.
And there we get into a whole other realm of
logic.
But fundamentally, the existential assumption is about making this decision,
that logic is cleaner if you can quantify over empty
sets.
And that means that.
If I write in first order logic.
For all x, p of x implies q of x
if it's the case that.
If p of x is false of everything you're talking
about.
In other words, there are no things that are p
of x.
Then the universal statement in modern logic is true.
For every thing x p of x implies q of
x, false implies anything is true.
And that's how we translate the Aristotelian term.
Every p is q.
And for Aristotle then we're saying but there aren't any
p.
And so he considered that a silly thing to say.
We don't.
So if we want to do Aristotle's reasoning, we need
to add the assumption to our basic reasoning techniques that
whenever we talk about something, it exists.
Hence, what we really want to write in modern logic
is.
That whatever predicate we might talk about.
There is something which satisfies it.
But we were doing syllogisms, so we didn't have modern
logic to hand.
So you started this long digression, not digression.
Is that the point that you're unhappy about so far,
or is it the the actual formulation that we come
to?
Yeah.
So I think what we said.
So that's how we wrote the existential assumption.
Right.
And it's a very weird thing at first sight, because
it says it is not the case that A entails,
not a and that seems odd because what does.
A entails not a mean.
That's clearly nonsense, right.
Because things can't be both A and not a, but
what that really means turned into first order logic.
Is for everything in the universe, a of x implies
not a of x.
Okay.
And then we go back up to where we were
before and say if A is false about everything in
the universe, then this statement is actually always true because
A is A of x is false for every x,
and therefore the implication because of this weird way implication
behaves is also true.
So it is possible for this sequence whole, but it's
only possible to hold if the universe is empty.
So therefore, if we simply cross it out, we're saying
the universe is not empty.
For you walking out there.
But you're just getting closer.
Thanks.
This is readable.
Yes.
Very readable.
So and then the the other aspect of the formulation
was this vertical line.
Remember what we're doing when we write a proof rule
is saying from what's on top what's on the bottom
follows.
So if we leave the top blank that says what's
below follows from nothing at all.
So it's always true.
So we've got various sorts of always true going on
here.
And we have the rules and the implication and the
sequent.
Does that help?
Okay.
Anybody else?
Yeah.
So applying the existential assumption to some syllogism that sounds
a good thing to do.
, this means you want me to prove a syllogism
in front of you or produce a counterexample, right?
Or something.
, let's try to derive one of the Aristotelian syllogisms
from Barbara.
I hope I can do this.
, anybody have the book handy to save me?
Trying to look it up.
Can you find me an Aristotelian existential syllogism that isn't
valid for us, but is for Aristotle.
Not very quickly, but neither can I find one very
quickly, except the one that was in the tutorial.
But that would be boring.
, I have some slides on them, didn't I?
But I didn't list the others.
No.
That was a good example, I think.
, it was, but then presumably you've all just done
it, so therefore you don't need to go through it
again.
.
Oh.
That's interesting.
It's better.
.
I thought he had a list of them.
Have I mentioned that you shouldn't use the Wikipedia page
on syllogisms?
So I don't know why it's linked in the book.
It's a lousy page.
Sorry.
So.
, the ones that we don't believe to be true.
Okay, here's here's an example, Bob, about about a let
me get that out of the way and write it
down in symbolic form.
So this syllogism says.
If A entails B.
And C entails a.
Then some Greeks see.
Okay.
So this is an Aristotelian syllogism supposedly.
Is it valid for us?
No.
Let me look further back in the room.
What can we say that tells us instantly that why
it's not valid for us?
You don't have a pair of knobs?
Yeah.
There's not.
So there's only one negated syllogism.
Okay.
Or to think about it another way.
Remember, the way we've set up syllogisms things with entails
a universal statements and things with not entails existential statements.
So this is making a formal statement and a formal
statement.
And therefore, for us as modern logicians, we haven't asserted
that anything exists, but on the bottom it's asserting something
exists.
So with a bit of luck, we can derive that
from Barbara and the existential assumption whether we can actually
do that online.
Let's see.
So somebody tell me what I might do.
So what I'm trying to do here is to build
a proof that the bottom holds.
And somewhere up top I want to use the existential
assumption.
Which means I would probably.
quite to have the negation on the top.
How could I get the negation to the top?
Well, actually, you know, maybe I don't want to do
that.
Whatever I do, there's going to be a negation here.
So which of these predicates?
I've got three predicates A, b and C, which is
the one where I'm asserting existence on the bottom.
C c yeah.
Agreed.
So I'm saying that some c are b because I'm
saying that seed is not entail not b.
So it's a fairly good bet.
That I'm going to need to use that assumption that
C exists in order to prove this.
Yeah.
You.
Can propose the print.
Which the.
So if we can propose the second premise and conclusion.
We get that.
So he.
Then confirms the first premise by itself.
Okay, so I was listening.
We know that not be not be and.
Then see is you know so.
So.
So I say that again.
Okay.
Let's see.
Yep.
Okay.
So if I sort of swap these round then I
get a Barbara shaped top.
So we know that.
From Barbara we get.
.
Not a yes.
Yep.
.
.
So, , so that again.
Is one element.
Then, you know.
Can we make that a formal up?
Put that into a rule somewhere.
Some of you did the exercise in the tutorial, so
can you apply what you did there to this slightly
different one?
Okay, so we plug these two together.
Plug these two together to get the result.
That's a much more complicated piece of reasoning than just
doing the manipulation from Barbara, where if you take any
of our sound syllogisms, the 15 of them, you can
just work.
Well, I find it easier to work backwards, but here
you have to work out how to plug the existential
assumption into the proof you're doing.
So that was done on the fly, and it's not
terribly clear.
Would it be helpful for me to take this and
after this lecture, write it out in a neat form
and post the result?
Okay.
Yeah, of course this is a bad move because that
means it's more work for me, whereas you're the ones
supposed to be doing the work, but never mind.
, doing proofs live is something I have always found
very difficult.
So that's why I ask you to do it because
many of you are better at it than I am.
What do you think a proof is?
So what we've been doing here is trying to show
that a particular particular conclusion is sound.
By assuming particular premises and by applying some rules that,
let us say a conclusion follows from these premises.
Are we doing something real or are we just shuffling
symbols around?
You may possibly have never thought about this issue, but
it's something that worries mathematicians.
Well, it doesn't worry concerns mathematicians quite a lot.
Is mathematics real?
If it is real, what kind of real is it?
.
So I guess that depends.
Do you believe that there could be a different universe
in which, , Pythagoras theorem was false?
You do?
Okay, interesting.
So how are you stating Pythagoras theorem for that?
.
Mhm.
Okay, so Pythagorean geometry, Pythagoras theorem is a statement about
triangles in the plane in a Euclidean plane.
, you should know this is Pythagoras.
Is Pythagoras theorem true for triangles that we draw on
the surface of the Earth?
No.
Anybody not know that?
So the flatness of the surface is essential.
And the easiest way to think, to see that is
to think about the globe.
I'm no good at drawing three dimensional objects, but let's
try anyway.
.
So there's the Earth and there's the equator and there's
the pole.
If you think about this triangle.
Has 390 degree angles in it, but it's a triangle
on the surface of a sphere.
And so Pythagoras doesn't apply on the.
And none of the triangle geometry applies.
, and of course, those of you who are doing
physics or have done some physics know that whatever else
the universe is, it is probably not a Euclidean geometry.
Actually, that's not Pythagoras theorem anyways.
It's you have to get something else to make a
Pythagorean nonsense out of it.
, so there's an issue about what mathematics is, to
the extent that it's a universal truth and what it
is to the extent that it's true in the universe
we're working on, and whether logic is a universal truth.
So if you ask a logician.
They will say that logic is a universal truth.
Why?
Fundamentally, because we are symbols shuffling what we do when
we do logic, or if we do group theory, which
you will be doing if you're doing maths or Newtonian
dynamics, you set up some assumptions.
You set up some equations which you think are a
model of the world.
If it's the world you're modelling and then you prove
some stuff using those equations and definitions, and then it's
up to you to validate whether your conclusion actually works
in the real world.
If you're doing applied mathematics.
As I said in the very beginning of the lecture,
in logic, we have lots of different forms of logic.
So we're giving you classical logic.
But classical logic is not always the right logic to
be talking about a particular real life problem, because you
may be talking about a problem involving people's beliefs involving
probabilities, where classical logic is simply not a good model.
So mathematicians tend to be quite schizophrenic about this.
, who has heard of the term Platonism?
Two.
Two.
Any advance on two.
Okay.
Three.
Two and a half.
Three.
Platonism is.
This is a simplification because it's always more complicated.
Platonism is a philosophical view point that things are real,
and in particular mathematical objects are real.
So the real numbers exist, complex numbers exist.
The wavefunction of the electron exists.
And as I go through those, through through those three
things, you might be more and more sceptical about whether
they actually exist.
But I think most working Mathematicians go through their everyday
lives on the basis that we're talking about things that
exist.
On the other hand, it's impossible to come up with
a very convincing justification for why these things exist.
We can't even come up with a justification for ourselves
existing.
So how do I know you're there?
How do I know I'm here?
Could all be in a simulation.
I don't believe we are.
I don't believe those arguments.
But that's a matter of faith rather than reason.
And so there's an alternative view which says that mathematics
is simply symbol shuffling according to derived rules.
We have some symbols, we have rules for transforming symbols.
And what comes out of the end is just what
comes out at the end according to our particular rules.
And this is a very computer science way of thinking
about logic.
But curiously, it led on to some very important and
profound developments in logic.
Even if you think logic is real, which we will
not be able to cover in this lecture in this
course, but which you will meet later on, and at
the moment I'm wasting time.
Enthusiastically.
Let me stop wasting time and say, what else would
you to discuss?
Yeah.
That's.
The one where I split the universe in half.
That was the way of the comma, I believe.
Yeah.
, I don't believe I would.
Was that this lecture week or last week?
I've got an hour.
Yeah.
, so that was this.
I'm not entirely sure that I would have chosen to
put this in had I been writing the course or
the book in the first place, but it's essentially trying
to justify the use of these.
Let me get my red circle up again.
The use of these sequence with sets of premises on
the left and right hand side.
So if I'm thinking about a whole bunch of things
together with a entailed B.
How do I think about that?
I mean, we've said that comma means and and the
sets are really separated by commas.
So logically speaking, I'm saying everything in and of everything
in gamma together with Anded with A gives you B.
, but that's not the way I tend to be
thinking about it, because if I'm looking at a particular
proof when I'm doing one stage in a proof, remember
you're looking for a one rule to apply, and the
rules all talk about one thing on the left and
one thing on the right.
And doing something.
To one of them, or usually just one thing on
the right and just one thing on the left.
So there's the exchange will even.
That's one thing.
So we're only looking at one thing.
But often when I'm deciding what to do here, I
might be looking for a rule that I can apply
to a.
And it might be that what's in gamma is just
some stuff that is going to be carried around for
several steps in the proof.
We're doing short proofs.
So even if you look at proofs .
This one.
.
So if you look at this proof here, then once
we've broken down the right hand side, you with a
comma on the right so that this p splits off
into the comma.
Remember that bit okay.
So this p is now being carried all the way
up this tree and all the way up this tree
without ever changing.
So it's not what we're focusing on and all the
things we're not focusing on.
We can shuffle off into Delta on the right or
gamma on the left.
, and where does the other way of thinking about
it come?
So that's this idea of thinking about gamma as the
background assumptions at this stage in the proof, when we
look at the Venn diagram, this is the Venn diagram
for A entails B, which remember says the a only
bit is empty because every A must be in here
in B.
But when we have the gamma in here A entails
B is only true when all of gamma are there
as well, because we need the gamma and A to
entail B.
So in terms of the Venn diagram, it's saying we
know it's empty provided that gamma holds.
And here I'm just splitting the universe into the bit
where gamma all hold and the bit where any of
gamma doesn't hold.
So I'm not really sure that the diagram is terribly
useful.
It's there for people who diagrammatic reasoning.
And presumably Mike Foreman, who wrote this, likes diagrammatic reasoning
because he put all these Venn diagrams in in the
first place.
I'm a symbolic reasoner, so it doesn't do much for
me.
But some people diagrams.
, yeah, since I've said that.
So in your own view of yourself, how many people
would say they're primarily pictorial reasoners.
Diagrammatic reasoners?
Very few.
Primarily symbolic reasoners.
Very few, but slightly more.
, which leaves a lot of people who are either
equally happy with both or equally unhappy with both.
.
How do you reason?
Comes up with.
How do you program as well?
So I notice on Piazza a few places where Don
has been saying you cannot do programming by trial and
error.
And I'm sure that observation is addressed to many more
than the one person it was addressed to at the
time.
But of course, it's also true.
In maths you can't do maths by trial and error.
But let's be honest about it.
The process of actually constructing a mathematical proof can involve
quite a lot of trial and error thinking.
Maybe this is the way I go about it, but
then you have to do the rigorous steps and you
get stuck.
So you say that didn't work.
I have another idea, and this is actually true of
the best mathematicians in the world, as well as the
everyday mathematicians us.
They have ideas, they try them out, they don't work.
They have another idea.
And these days they even ask asked ChatGPT for ideas.
How many of you heard of have heard of Terence
Tao?
Okay.
, so if you have any interest in modern mathematics
at all, look up Terence Tao and listen to some
of his lectures, some of his talks.
Read what he does.
He's an interesting person because he is quite possibly the
most brilliant mathematician on the planet today.
And he's also a nice, warm, ordinary human being, which
was very much not the case of most of the
great mathematicians of the last century.
, he was a child prodigy, so he was one
of these people who got a gold medal in the
International Mathematical Olympiad at the age of 11 or 12
or something.
, but unlike many child prodigies, he continued to develop
as a mathematician, and he's a quite remarkable problem solver.
So he likes digging into a new field, finding a
problem, and then solving it.
Which can be quite annoying for the people who've who've
spent their careers working on the problem, but it advances
mathematics.
The reason I mention him is because about a year
ago, when I was being very sceptical about ChatGPT, as
I still am, I was a bit shocked to receive
to listen to a talk by him where he said
ChatGPT gives me some good ideas despite the fact that
it's complete garbage, it's hallucinates nonsense, but it can still
give you ideas.
And he said it cut quite a lot of time
off finding the right way to approach some problem.
, I'm still enthusiastically wasting time.
, anything else to do?
Any other concrete questions?
Nothing.
.
Okay, well, I could make us sit here.
I could probably talk randomly about something else for another
seven minutes, but I'm not sure it's entirely useful.
, what I would ask you to do.
So if you've done the tutorial and you were happy
with it, then there's really nothing more to say.
If you did the tutorial and were unhappy with it,
so you found it difficult to do some of the
proofs in particular.
I mean, so the existential one is tricky, but the
other proofs are things you should be able to do
because they're almost unthinking.
And let me give you a heads up that it's
going to be quite important to be able to do
these proofs, or at least to understand why they're done,
because you have an exercise coming up at the end
of the course, then use Piazza and use yourselves.
So remember, we encourage you to talk to each other.
We're one of the few courses that encourages collaboration.
So if there were a bunch of people who are
feeling that they would to work some more on
this, and if you're not sure who each other are,
then remember that you can post anonymously to each other
on Piazza so you can, if you wish, post.
Is there anybody else who would a little self-help
group on proofs?
And if you so choose at an appropriate time and
you want me to come along, I could do so.
Although that's not the ideal.
I don't have many appropriate times, because that's the way
my job is at the moment.
But all things are possible.
Potentially.
And also tutorials.
, since we've got a moment.
Tutorials.
Tutorials in this course are always a little bit problematic
because there are people who really need them.
There are people don't.
I guess those of you who are attending the lecture
are not a representative sample.
So straw poll tutorials, useful or not?
So who thinks useful?
That's not really enough.
Who thinks definitely not useful.
Okay, that's actually not too bad.
, which means some of you, quite a few of
you think they have some utility, but not a great
deal.
So if you have ideas for making them more useful,
then do tell your tutor, because we have a very
wide range of tutors and also tell us.
Okay, so unless you come back tomorrow with some very
burning questions.
I think we're going to make an early start on
the week six material, get ahead a bit, and hopefully
have a slightly more relaxed rest of the semester.
Thanks.
And I will light this up a bit more neatly
and post it.
Saving it.
For the existential assumption.
And just be a Venn diagram with an exercise for
neutral.
That's it.
That's how.
And for the week six material, can you post the
reading that we should.
Yes yeah I will arrive as soon as I get
back to my office.
I'll publish the week six stuff.
Okay.
Thank you.
Hi.
I'm coming a second time to ask about this.
So the second I left, I completely forgot.
Okay, so why is the not feeling good?
Because there can't be something.
They can't know they're not P is there?
Because it came in from here.
So we have a rule that says this thing is
an and that's the end in the middle.
So the rule for sorry the rule for and on
the right says you break it into two trees.
So this p is two there this and carries to
there.
And then this.
Not pork goes there and this not P goes there
okay.
So he did he did the.
He did.
At the same time.
or for the P.
No.
So so this P is just being carried through.
This is being carried through as part of a delta
on the right.
So we're not doing anything to that.
In this world, we're focusing entirely on this formula here.
And it's an end formula.
So we break it down and we have to do
two separate subtrees.
One there for this half, one there for that half.
And the P is just the stuff on the right
that's unchanged when we do this bit.
So.
We understand.
What I want just for clarification again.
So according to existential rule this what for us
would be not implies equals to this , which
would be easier to draw towards this lower c
not implies a.
So C does not imply a.
C implies not a no.
Because this says that every C is not A, and
this says that some sea is not a.
Exactly.
So I thought existential assumption would work.
It makes it equal.
No not.
No.
What does existential assumption here.
How do we see it says.
I mean, it says what it says, which is that.
It just.
It says something exists.
So universal statements.
Assert for all something or other.
But they don't assert the existence.
Or existence.
Yeah.
So again, so the social assumption we're talking about for
example, and modal logic and thought about all universe.
And the assumption comes down to language.