We're recruitment secretaries for Informatics Rugby.
We're a casual intramural rugby team created, , last year.
And, , we're here to talk to you a little
bit about what we do, hopefully recruit you.
, we play games most Wednesdays at Peppermill.
We train most Sundays, , in the Meadows, just out
the back of the library.
, yeah.
, just exactly what he said.
, we have a QR code up there on the
screen.
, it's a mix of different subjects, but it is
supposed to be informatics.
Hence why we're here talking to you.
, training as a mix of contact, fitness, skill level
building, , then, , and set up for ML
on Wednesdays against other subjects to play.
You will need, , rugby boots and you will need,
, gum guard if you want to take part in
contact.
We also have socials every Wednesday and Sunday after whatever's
been on that day.
and it would be really great to see all the
majority of you here.
And for anyone who's not interested in rugby, if you
look up and from our sport on Instagram, you'll find
links to various different sports and depending on what you're
interested in.
So yeah, thanks guys.
Hope to see all of you there.
Right.
Rugby of course, is not the only sport.
If you haven't realised there are lots of sports found
here.
My sport is target shooting.
Edinburgh University Rifle Club is or.
Okay.
It's 30 years since I was last in it, but
it's a great place.
Used to be.
, so we started on some content yesterday.
Fairly mild content, especially if you've done computer science.
And let me just recap a bit.
So generally speaking, at the start of each lecture I
take any questions you have on what happened in the
previous lecture.
So yesterday we were talking about the notion of binary
information, the notion of bit, the use of decision trees
or yes, no questions in a particular order to allow
us to assign binary codes to things, because we're going
to be working entirely in terms of true and false
for most of this course.
And yesterday one of you asked me if I could
talk louder.
The volume on this thing is hiked up to maximum.
Is it okay at the moment or should I increase
my speaking volume as well?
Okay.
Yep.
A bit of a For tickle in the throat today.
So are there any questions about the stuff we covered
yesterday?
If you have any uncertainties at all, and let me
remind you that if you have a question, probably 20
other people have the questions.
So never feel shy about asking a question.
There are no stupid questions.
It's possible for me to give a stupid answer.
Okay, so you know you have a tutorial next week
and you also know that you haven't been allocated to
them yet.
We are hoping very much that you will be allocated
to them before they happen.
, here's a little thing that some of you might
to do.
I guess you watch films on phones or possibly even
laptops, but maybe tablets.
in theory.
How many possible one hour HD digital movies are there?
So in order to do that, you need to do
the kind of estimate and calculation that hopefully you learned
in the sciences.
, have a go and talk with your colleagues in
tutorial and see how many different answers you get.
Experience tells me that some of you are going to
do it right now, and we'll have an answer in
five minutes, but if I have time at the end
of the lecture, then I'll take any answers from the
class.
Now, I don't know what the answer is, I can't
remember.
I have a note somewhere, but frankly, who cares?
But it's quite an alarming number.
So what I want to do today is move on
to something which is actually more about what we're doing
in this course and is more fun.
Yesterday was just setting up the framework that we're only
going to be thinking about true and false things.
So now I want to talk a little bit about
logic.
I said that logic was the language of reasoning.
Why do we need a language of reasoning?
Because the language we speak and write is often ambiguous.
It's often imprecise, which is usually often a good thing.
And it's also very verbose and long winded.
It takes us a lot of words to say something
that could be specified precisely.
And this is true even when people are trying really,
really hard not to be any of those things.
And this is why we have lawyers.
And unfortunately, lawyers do not get trained in logic.
And over the last four weeks, I had a very
painful experience with a lawyer who doesn't understand basic logic.
So logic is useful if you ever have to argue.
Why is logic core to a computer science course?
Because informatics is fundamentally mathematics and logic applied to things
that are going to do computing for us.
And the reason we have mathematics and logic is because
they enable us to talk clearly, precisely and concisely.
But perhaps more importantly, they require us to talk clearly,
precisely and concisely.
It's quite hard to be imprecise in mathematics.
It's possible to write down a precise mathematical statement without
understanding what you're writing down.
And I imagine that you've had that experience at some
stage in your mathematics learning.
But what you wrote down had a meaning, even if
it wasn't the one you intended.
So logic is a language, an artificial language intended to
achieve precise communication about a narrow range of things.
It's a very old subject in Western European civilisation.
It's about 2500 years old.
In other civilisations, it's older, although not developed in the
same way.
And we're going to be starting with something which most
of you have probably seen before.
If you've done computer science at school, you've probably seen
this before.
If you haven't, you might not.
So if I say propositional logic, Boolean logic, how many
of you know what I mean?
How many of you think you should know what I
mean?
If you remembered what happened last year or two years
ago?
Okay, so not as many, which could mean computer science
syllabuses have changed.
So yesterday we were talking about reducing our conversation to
a series of yes no statements or questions.
Well, the question is something that comes from a statement,
and we're going to use a technical term proposition.
So it's written in purple.
It's something I'm defining for the purposes of this course.
So a proposition is something that is a statement.
It's simple in some way.
And it's either true or false.
So here are some examples of statements that might be
considered to be either true or false.
The moon is round.
It is raining here and now I mooncakes.
That book is yellow.
, so I said that those were simple statements, but
they're not really simple statements.
Is the moon round?
Yes, yes.
I mean, it's sort of round in much the same
way that the Earth is sort of round.
It depends what you mean by round, doesn't it?
In most useful conversations, the moon is round.
But if by round you mean perfectly spherical, then of
course it isn't.
So there's an complexity there.
What do we mean by round the moon?
I suppose we agreed.
Is it raining here or now?
Well, that depends whether by here and now I mean
inside this lecture theatre or whether I mean up there
outside.
So again, that apparently simple statement has a lot of
external information.
I mooncakes.
Well, I'm the one speaking, so presumably I'm the only
one who can answer that.
And the answer to it is in fact, yes.
Until I ate one too many and then I haven't
been able to eat one since.
, that book is yellow.
That's a quite a complex linguistic statement because it has
that in it.
So there's a lot of language in there which is
telling you which book I'm talking about.
I don't actually have any books.
Anybody have a yellow book?
No, sir.
Thank you.
Is that book yellow?
Well.
Or that book is yellow?
Yep.
A true false statement.
So all of that complexity is not logical.
Or at least it's not logical in the sense of
logic that we're going to be talking about it.
It's more to do with linguistics.
Semantics is the area of linguistics we might be talking
about.
What does a word mean?
So that's not the kind of logic we're going to
assume that we know what we're talking about, and all
our questions have definitive answers about whether they're yes or
no.
, any questions or challenges about that?
So quite often during the course, I'm going to make
statements and some of them will be obvious and some
of them will be obvious and false.
So if you think I might have made an obviously
a statement that is false, do shout because it might
be deliberate.
, I don't have any plan for this lecture as
far as I know.
So because we're working as mathematicians or logicians or whatever.
We're going to introduce symbolic notation.
And there's a lot of useful convention that we use
in maths and in logic to save words.
So conventionally I'm going to use uppercase Letters from about
the middle of the alphabet from Pcast.
And those are going to be things that stand for
propositions.
And most of the time, I don't really care what
propositions they stand for, because I'm going to be reasoning
abstractly about what we can do with propositions.
But occasionally I might want them to talk about a
particular proposition, such as the moon is round.
So the key things are propositions or statements that are
true or false.
And I'm going to use letters such as P and
Q to range over them, as we say.
One of the things that we experience in this course
is that Don and I are both both mathematicians, computer
scientists, whatever you want to call us of 40 or
50 years standing, which means we have forgotten what it
was not to be a mathematician or logician.
So if I use a word and you don't know
what it means, or you don't know what it means
in the context.
Shout because there will be others, and it will simply
mean that I've forgotten that it wasn't taught in school.
So I try to avoid these because every year I
learn a new one.
But please shout as soon as there is anything you
don't understand.
Okay, so what can we do with propositions?
The statement that the moon is round is not all
that interesting.
Well, I suppose it is interesting because it tells us
a lot about the nature of the universe and the
solar system and the way it formed.
But for more complex forms of reasoning, we usually want
to be able to start with some proposition and end
up with another proposition, because we know something and we
want to work something out from it.
For example.
If you get 71% on an assessment, then that is
a grade A, so that's a rule that is actually
embedded somewhere in the university's regulations.
And there's a reasoning process that takes you from Mark
greater than 71 to grade is a.
, so much of logic is about combining propositions in
some sense.
Almost all of logic is about combining combining propositions.
So the question is how many ways can we combine
them.
And this is where things can get a bit confusing
to start with, because we use words in logic with
very specific meanings, although those words are also everyday words,
where they also have a meaning that we think we
understand and that may not be precisely the same.
So one of the main combinations in logic is, and
I think we all know what and means in most
circumstances.
So if I say p and q, I mean that
p is q and q is true.
And that sounds a circular definition, right?
But it is because I have to define logic in
terms of something.
Where things get slightly more interesting will be a bit
in the next operator.
But another thing I need to warn you about logic
is that there are lots and lots of different notations.
Because it's an old subject.
Modern logic is not so old.
Modern logic is about 150 years old, but it's changed
a great deal over those 150 years.
And people's preferred notations vary.
So when I want to write and and I'm talking
in logical sense, I will usually use a symbol, because
that makes it clear that it's the precise meaning.
This thing which I'm going to pronounce and and various
people pronounce in various other ways, is the symbol that
we use in this course.
Other people, typically in a slightly older and more philosophical
tradition, will usually use the and symbol, the ampersand symbol.
IDE or curiosity?
How many of you know what ampersand means as a
word?
So you know it means this symbol.
But do you know why it means that symbol?
Yeah.
Sorry.
, it used to be a letter.
, so I'm actually talking about the word ampersand.
So why is this particular symbol called an ampersand?
, It's a curious thing to know.
May be useful for pub pub quizzes.
Ampersand is actually a contraction by natural usage for the
phrase and per se, and per se is Latin, which
means by itself.
So this means and by itself.
And this is the symbol that by itself means and
, and that also demonstrates interesting linguistics things because we
have and pair turning into Ampere.
So that's a process of assimilation which is common in
language.
So it's a nice word useful for both basic phonology
and linguistics.
You will also see the dot, the dot you're familiar
with as a sign for multiplication, and we'll see a
bit later why and is a bit multiplication so
and is pretty straightforward.
Any questions about and.
We can write down a precise definition of what it
means using a truth table.
So who knows.
Truth tables should be a lot more of you.
Yes.
Good.
Okay, so those of you who haven't seen truth tables,
they're very boring things.
I write in the columns the values of P and
I write in the row, the value of q.
And in the table I just write down what the
value of p and q is.
So false and false is false.
False and true is true.
True and false is false.
False.
True and true is true.
So it's just a tabulation, the logical equivalent of a
multiplication table.
A more interesting conjunction is or.
So when I say p or q and the word
disjunction is the fancy Latin word for putting two propositions
together with or p or true q is true exactly
when at least one of p and q is true.
And you'll notice I've already confused matters by saying at
least one of P and Q when I'm talking about
or.
But I hope you see what I'm meaning there.
So P or q is true.
If p is true or q is true, or both
are true.
Does that match with the way you use or in
everyday language?
Yeah.
Shout!
Yeah.
So sometimes not always, but probably more often when we
use or in everyday language, we mean either or one
or the other, but not both.
So that's something to be careful to remember.
In logical usage, the plain or always means one or
the other, or both.
So an example of.
That might be.
You will not get an MSC distinction if you don't
get a distinction on the coursework, or you don't get
a distinction on the exam.
So in the way our MSC works, to get a
distinction, you have to get a distinction both from the
dissertation and the exam.
So if you fail either of them or both, then
you don't get a distinction.
But frequently in everyday life we mean one or the
other.
So if somebody offers you an apple or an orange,
then you're going to get one unless you explicitly say,
actually, I'd both, which may not be what they
meant to offer.
And again, there are many symbols in logic.
In modern logic, we tend to this symbol.
Computer scientists tend to the symbol.
It's the other way round.
I'm going to pronounce it, or some people will call
it V.
The same people who write the ampersand for and will
often write a vertical stroke for or not quite so
common.
You will also see plus because we will see that
or is the logical equivalent of addition in some ways.
But I'm going to use this one.
We can write a truth table for it.
Looks this.
False and false is false.
False and true is true.
True and false is true.
True and true is true.
, so any any questions about or.
The only catch is remembering that it includes the case
when both are true.
If I put the truth tables for and and or
side by side, what do you notice about them?
Sorry.
They're similar.
Can anybody say more precisely?
Where?
In the Lord there are three.
In the end, there's only one truth.
Yep.
And if you look, you see that this one is
got from this one by flipping it about the axis
and swapping.
True and false.
So that general thing is called duality.
And I'm not going to talk much about it now,
but a bit later in the course we will talk
about duality quite a lot.
Really what this is saying is that false and or
go together in the same way that true and and
go together.
So you'll see more of this later on, and eventually
it will become embedded in your brain so that you
can think about such things automatically.
Right.
Are we doing.
There's another proposition way of combining propositions that we use
a lot in everyday life, and that's denying something.
So not the negation of a proposition is true exactly
when the proposition is false, which I hope is what
we think not means in everyday life.
And again, there are lots and lots of symbols for
it.
So the one that we and the modern logicians
tend to use is this thing which we just pronounce
not.
It probably has some other name that I don't know.
Older logicians will use the twiddle, and if you want
to be formal about it, it's called a swung dash.
But twiddle is easier.
Sometimes we will use an over bar to say not
p, and we will do that sometimes in the course
because it has its uses.
But our main symbol for negation is this, , dash
with a tic at the end.
We can write a truth table for it.
It's a simpler truth table because there's only P, so
not p is true if p is false, and false
if p is true.
, do you think there's anything complicated about not.
Is it generally easier to show that something is true,
or to show that something is not true?
If it's not true?
Do you think it's easier to show that it's not
true?
All right.
So let me give you an example against that.
So my unpleasant legal experience over the last four weeks
because I've been buying a place, and one of the
issues that arose was whether there had been any alterations
to the property since it was converted into a flat.
I had an annoying, pedantic lawyer who said there might
have been.
Is it easier to demonstrate that an alteration has been
done, or to demonstrate that nothing has been done?
I mean, if an alteration has been done, then at
least you can see it.
But how do you look at the whole thing and
say nothing has been done?
, so there is a sense in which this is
true in logic as well, but that's a more complex
form of logic.
So proving something is something is usually easier than proving
that you can't prove something.
But proving something false is a different matter.
But for most purposes negation is easy because we know
what true and false are.
We have possibilities true and false.
And if we have the negation, we just flip them.
Where it gets complicated is if you have a don't
know.
So I don't know whether something is true, but then
I also don't know whether it's false.
And so negation becomes more interesting.
There are logics for dealing with that which I might
possibly mention right at the end of the course, but
for our purposes logic is very straightforward.
So I've given you three ways of combining propositions and
or and not.
So if we have combinations then we can build up
complex things.
In basic arithmetic you have plus minus times divide and
you build up complex expressions in some time, which is
probably fading from your memories.
You had to do evaluate expressions by hand, whereas now
you probably use calculators or hopefully not.
ChatGPT.
, so I can write down an expression that.
So if I say, what does that mean?
What do you say?
I want to go somewhere else.
Yeah.
Or not?
.
Okay.
So that's basically reading the statement.
What does the statement say?
Notice the brackets.
So we use brackets in logic in the same way
that we use them in arithmetic.
This means the sort of main operator here is an
or.
So I'm saying that either this is true or this
is true or both.
And this thing on the left says that both P
and Q are true.
And this thing on the left says that it's not
the case that both R and S are true.
So rather useless statement because you don't know what p,
q, r and s is.
But the point is that we can take arbitrary propositions
and build them up in the normal mathematical notation with
brackets in order to group things together.
So hopefully that's just familiar notation, maybe with some new
symbols.
Any questions about it or comments.
Do you think I need to tell you any more
ways of combining propositions?
A couple more.
Do I have to or are they just handy?
So actually, these four propositions are enough for all the
possible ways you can combine propositions.
And it's a reasonably good exercise to check that.
So I mean maybe not check it in detail, but
go and convince yourself that every possible way of combining
two propositions can be written in terms of and or
not, but in everyday reasoning, and especially in mathematical everyday
reasoning.
There's a combination of propositions that we use a lot
more than the others, in fact, and that is if
then implication.
So if I write if P, then q, then what
I mean is that if whenever p is true, q
has to be true.
If P, then q.
That is the combination you use in most of the
mathematical reasoning you do, because all mathematical, all mathematical theorems
have the form.
If something is true, then something else is true.
And again, there are lots and lots and lots of
symbols.
So you will see people using a single arrow.
You will see people using a double arrow.
You'll see people using this thing which looks a
back, which looks a superset symbol.
There's a reason for that.
And many others.
The one we're going to use is the single arrow.
And again, this is an operator which can be defined
with a truth table.
It works this.
So this is p implies q.
False implies true.
False implies true.
True implies false is false.
True implies true is true.
So look carefully at this first row here.
Does that actually make sense to you?
Good.
How many other people find it slightly disturbing?
Yep.
Why?
Why is it a bit disturbing?
Yeah, because he is false.
If P is false, shouldn't you be false as well?
And this truth table says that if P is false,
then it's okay for Q to be either false or
true.
So this is the single biggest difference between logic and
everyday life.
So to give you an example, here is an if
then statement with two propositions in it.
And I want you to tell me whether the if
then statement is true.
If the moon is made of green cheese, then I
am a banana.
It's true.
Right?
Which seems a bit odd.
.
The reason it's.
Why do we do this?
Why do we do this?
Fundamentally, we do this because things work better if we
do that.
And the real reason we do it is that we're
just talking about yes and no.
So we don't have any idea of an actual connection
between things.
So the statement I just made is absurd, because there's
no possible reasonable connection between the moon being made of
green cheese and me being a banana.
I mean, unless maybe you say the only way the
moon can be made of green cheese is if an
evil wizard has done it, and he might turn me
into a banana.
So the kind of logic we're dealing with has no
conception of connections between propositions.
It only knows whether they are true or false.
And in that setting, if you don't know anything about
if you know that P is false, then the safest
thing to do is say, I don't know anything about
Q.
It could be true.
It could be false.
So if then is a statement about P being true,
making a positive requirement that Q is true and not
the other way round?
Not about the negative.
There's a buzzword for this.
It's called the problem of material implication.
So this kind of implication is called material implication because
it only looks at the matter, the content of the
proposition, and doesn't think at all about whether there's any
sensible relation between them.
So if we look at what P implies, Q says,
if we look at that truth table, consider this statement
here.
Either q is true or p is false, q or
not p so Q is true or p is false.
If you check this formula against that truth table, you'll
see that they're the same.
So we don't actually need the implication operator around.
We could always just write it out this.
However we tend to think in terms of implication.
We think in terms of one thing implying another.
So this is a very useful operator to have for
the purpose of human reasoning.
But it is also important in a lot of cases
to be able instantly to convert it to this form.
So try to get that into your brains now.
And again, just a side note going on to this.
The reason this first row looks odd is because it
says false implies everything.
Whatever you form, whatever you have on the right of
the arrow, false implies it.
At the moment we're only talking about propositions, but later
in the course we'll get on to proving things, proving
theorems, taking some assumptions.
And in normal mathematics, in normal logic, it's also the
case that if you can prove false, then you can
prove everything.
So the Latin term for that which was popular when
logic was a philosophical subject, is ex Folsom quarterly bit
out of falsehood.
You can get anything you .
And the reason that's used a lot is because it's
what underlies proof by contradiction.
So I guess in your school maths you have done
how many people have done proof by contradiction at school?
So most but not all.
Okay.
You're going to see more of it.
Proof by contradiction actually relies on force behaving in this
way.
There is a more refined branch of reasoning and logic
where that's no longer true, but that's a harder to
deal with.
Okay, any questions about if and then.
Yeah.
Was that a question?
But.
You have to shout really loud from back there.
Or, you know, you almost.
Yeah.
How is that possible?
Well, just so just check the truth tables.
So take this expression, write down the truth table for
it, and you'll see that it's the same as that.
But if you think about it without looking at the
truth table P implies q.
That means if p is true, then q has to
be true.
If q is true, then we have nothing to check
because p can be true or false.
If Q is not true, then P has to be
false because otherwise P would be true, which would force
Q to be true.
So you can do it by reasoning or you can
just check the truth table.
Okay.
So that's all the logical combinators that we're going to
use.
A little bit later, we'll introduce 1 or 2 more
that are useful for special purposes, but these are the
main ones we use when we write down systems of
reasoning.
Now I want to just make an observation.
Does everybody know Venn diagrams?
Does anybody not know Venn diagrams?
That's good because we told you to read about them
before coming here.
So, , if you look at logic, it looks very
much Venn diagram P and q looks p
intersect q, p or q looks p union Q,
not P looks complement of P.
That is not, of course, a coincidence.
So what's the meaning of P?
Well, the meaning of p is the things of which
p is true.
And then what's the meaning of P and q?
The meaning of p and q is the things that
have of which p is true, and q is true,
and that is the intersection of the things for which
p and q, and the set of things for which
q are true.
So fundamentally and an intersection of the same or and
union of the same, not and complement of the same,
it's just that up here we're thinking about abstract propositions.
And down here we're thinking about the sets of things
that have that proposition as one of their characteristics.
So I'm just mentioning this.
Yeah.
Absolute values.
, so kind of a side note.
So I'm this double bar is a computer science notation
for the meaning of p.
And by definition it's the set of things of which
p holds.
So if I have a universe, the meaning of p
in that universe is the set of objects at which
P is true.
And that's that's how we actually define logic applied to
universes when we're being really, really formal, which we're not
going to do in this course because we're just going
to assume we know what it means.
Okay.
So that's propositions, simple statements.
You don't get very far with simple statements.
So in everyday life we want to make statements not
just true or false, but we want to make statements
about things.
So if we look back at the proposition I had
I said the moon is round.
Well, obviously that breaks down into two things.
There's the thing I'm talking about the moon, and there's
the thing I'm saying about it, which is is round.
if you learned the grammar of your own language or
any other language in a traditional style, you may be
familiar with terms subject, predicate, and complement.
How many are familiar with that as a grammar term?
Yep, there isn't enough old fashioned grammar teaching in logic.
We sometimes talk about such things.
So in logic, a predicate is a proposition about things.
So it's the proposition is round about a thing.
And the point of a predicate is that we can
apply it to lots of different things.
So the predicate round can be applied to the moon
to say the moon is round.
And I can also apply it to the sun and
say the sun is round.
So now I've abstracted away from particular objects, and I
have a notion of predicate which is about properties of
objects.
So.
Is round is something that takes one argument.
As we say, it takes the object I'm talking about
the predicate is something that has two arguments because
the statement I mooncakes can be plugged in with
different things for AI and mooncake.
, I don't know.
You rigatoni.
So is what we call a two place predicate.
So individual things might have names the moon or
eye.
And there's a misprint there.
And we have variables.
We will use variables x and y lowercase x and
y.
So this is the same kind of variable that you're
familiar with.
In mathematical usage you use a variable to range over
numbers in a problem.
So x and y refers to some arbitrary thing.
And we will represent predicates by the same letters as
the propositions.
But we will give them arguments as well.
So if p is a unary predicate is round,
then p of x is a proposition, and it means
that the predicate p is true of the thing x.
So for example, is round applied to the moon, likes
is a binary predicate, takes an x and a y,
and its true if x likes y.
So this would be likes I comma mooncakes.
Is that a reasonably comfortable notation?
Are there any issues with that notation.
It should be yeah.
Thank you.
Good.
, there are an awful lot of Latin and Greek
words floating around in mathematics in the days when everybody
learned Latin and Greek at school.
That was fine, but that's no longer the case, and
many of you are from places where it would be
quite reasonable, for you have learned Classical Arabic or Sanskrit
or Middle Chinese instead of Latin or Greek.
So unary means one issue.
Binary means two.
Okay, I just want to mention that there is one
very special binary predicate, which is equality.
We're going to write equality in the usual way
that.
So x equals y.
This is true if x and y are the same
thing.
In this course we won't get into the reasons why
it's special.
So in more advanced logic than it behaves slightly different
from others.
But for our purposes It's just a predicate that we're
going to write in a particular way.
So I've told you about propositional logic.
I'm just going to put up a little bit about
first order logic.
We're not going to do first order logic.
It makes us sorry.
First order logic allows us to make more complex statements.
So again, let me do a quick check.
These are the symbols usually used in modern maths.
How many of you are familiar with these two symbols?
About one fifth or less.
Okay.
So we will introduce them a bit later because they
have their uses.
So this is for all.
This says for every x p of x is true.
And this says there exists an x such that p
of x is true.
So you make statements this in mathematics .
, every prime number greater than two is odd or.
I can't think of an existential statement right now, but
you make statements that are true of all things, or
you might want to exhibit an example of something.
And the thing I want to say now is that
this lets you say an awful lot.
So those of you who are CS math students are
probably going to do an analysis course this year, next
year.
Third year there is definitely honours analysis, but you probably
do some analysis in second year.
And in analysis you will see a concept called a
function from the rails to rails being everywhere continuous.
And you will see it written out defined this.
This is a complicated formula.
It says for all something for all something there exists
something for all.
Something.
And there's an implication.
This is pretty much about the limit of where normal
humans can understand formulae.
So mathematicians have ways of understanding much worse formulae by
breaking them down.
But it illustrates that first order logic is quite difficult
for two reasons.
Firstly, it's hard to understand.
This is a very short formula, but it's already quite
hard to understand.
And computers can produce formulae that are thousands of pages
long.
The other reason first order logic is hard is that
if you write down an arbitrary statement in first order
logic about an arbitrary universe, I can't necessarily tell you
whether it's true or not.
That's why mathematics is not trivial.
If this were not the case, then mathematics would be
a trivial subject.
We could just feed it to a computer and get
the answer.
, first order logic is what mathematicians use in everyday
life and much other reasoning.
It's a remarkably recent discovery about 140 years old.
But because it's hard in both these ways, we are
not going to teach you first order logic in this
course, except a bit right at the end.
What we're going to do in this course is to
teach you something that is a bit more powerful than
propositional logic.
It lets you say useful things, but it's manageable.
It's not so hideously complex as first order logic.
And so that's what we will introduce next week.
We will introduce the logic that was developed about 2000
years ago.
And then we'll spend a few years going through 1500
years of logic.
So next week I see you on Tuesday because Don
and I are swapping lectures and if anybody has questions
come down.