All right.
Good afternoon.
So I hope you all got here safely through the
exciting wind at Idle Curiosity.
How many of you cycle?
Not very many.
Okay.
It's exciting time of year for cyclists.
, so I said we were beginning to move away
from logic.
We're still doing one more week of logic, but we're
doing logic from an engineer's viewpoint.
So it's actually possible that some of you already know
this stuff, so who knows.
Corner maps.
Okay, you can go to sleep for the week if
you want.
Or you might learn something new.
You never know.
As you can see from the slide, we're reaching into
the 20th century in terms of the work done, which
means that we're at the sad stage of the course
where every week I have to go and check whether
the people on my cover slides are still alive or
not.
And sadly, Maurice Connor died in my second year of
teaching the course.
I never met him.
He looks as if he was a lovely guy, but
I don't actually know that.
So the topic of today and to Thursday is Connor
maps.
What are coronal maps?
They're a way of extracting a formula from a picture.
So we've been using Venn diagrams to try to understand
formulae and kernel maps without going the other way.
What happens if you have the picture or the truth
table and you want to get a formula out of
it?
And this is something that engineers want to do because
engineers work in pictures.
I'm going to be stereotyping vigorously for the next week,
but you need to program informally.
So to set up the context, suppose we have two
predicates that we're thinking about called a and B.
How many different universes are there with A and B
predicates?
For I'm seeing a lot of some hands saying for
any want to choose anything other than four.
Good.
.
So that's how many different regions there are.
Now, is that the same as the number of universes
we can distinguish?
So because two predicates lets us to separate the universe
into four bits.
So in principle, we could construct a universe with different
things in each of those four bits, which might give
us a new idea about how many distinct universes there
are, which have just two predicates in them.
So the people who have four, do you feel inclined
to change your mind?
You've got four by going two to the two.
Right.
Or something that.
So if I have A and B, I can describe
four regions of the universe.
, what does it mean for two universes to be
distinguishable?
Basically, it's whether they're inhabited.
Each region is inhabited or not.
Could be empty, could be inhabited.
So if I have four regions and each of them
can be either inhabited or empty.
How many different universes does that give me?
16.
So yeah, they look that.
So that's quite a lot of different universes with predicates.
And you can obviously see what happens as you add
predicates.
, if we do the calculation, the numbers grow up.
, how many of you get extremely annoyed every time
some non-technical person talks about something increasing exponentially?
Right.
Hopefully by the end of this course, that will be
99.8% of you.
This is a case of exponential growth.
In fact, it's worse.
It's a case of doubly exponential gross growth, which is
a meaningful concept with four predicates.
There are 65,000 different universes that we could be talking
about.
And so one of the questions we might ask is
given a universe with these predicates, can we write down
the formula that describes it uniquely amongst all the other
universes?
So by example, if we're looking at this very simple
universe here, this is what we had as the syllogism,
as the categorical proposition.
Every B is A right.
So every B is a was our syllogism or categorical
proposition statement.
But can we just describe it in terms of Boolean
logic.
Well we look at it and say which regions are
inhabited.
The outside is that is, that is and this is
empty.
So we can just describe each region in term in
turn.
We can say not A or B, , whereas not
A or B that's the outside or a or not,
b or not B is there or a and B
or the middle.
So it's okay for any of those to be inhabited.
And that's a brute force way of describing it.
Just looking at every inhabited region and saying that they
can all be inhabited, but this one isn't mentioned.
And so it's not going to be.
But that's certainly not the shortest formula we want.
And if we're going to describe this universe for circuit
layout tool or whatever it is we're doing.
So these were electronic engineers that did this or electrical
engineers.
The difference was less well defined in those days.
If we look at that formula, there are a bunch
of things we can do.
It can be simplified in various ways.
So it can be simplified that by pulling out
A, not B.
, we could alternatively think about describing the places that
are empty.
So this region here is what region is this B
and not a b and not a.
And that must be false.
So we could describe this universe by saying that B
and not A must be false negating it.
And then we could apply to Morgan's law if we
want it and say it's A or not B.
So a bunch of formulae, all of which are equivalent,
all of which describe this universe.
And the question is, if I give you something that
is not just a two predicate picture where you have
16 choices, but a four for a picture where you
have 65,000 choices, how can you go from the picture
which you can't understand, or the truth table To a
formula that uniquely characterises the universe.
Right.
Do you get what we're trying to do?
Extract here?
, I can increase it by one tiny notch, and
otherwise I can try putting this closer.
Does that help?
Okay, thanks.
, so the idea here is getting a logical description
from something that is either a picture or just the
truth table, because these pictures are our graphical way of
representing truth tables in one way.
.
I have a little side issue here.
This is actually a relevant side issue for computer scientists.
, back in the olden days.
And actually, still, you probably don't need to think about
it.
But back in the olden days, discs were expensive, and
when you bought a 200 gigabyte disk, you expected to
be able to fit 200GB of files on it.
And it was very annoying to find out that you
could only fit 195GB or whatever it is on it.
And the reason for that was because disk manufacturers use
the C prefix giga, which means multiply by ten to
the nine, whereas most things in computer science use the
binary.
I hope that computer's not about to explode.
Most things in computer science use the binary prefix.
We say giga, but usually we don't mean multiply by
ten to the minus nine.
Usually we mean multiply by ten to the 30, which
is 1074 Around 74 million, roughly, instead of a thousand
million.
So this was a great source of annoyance for a
large portion of my life.
And eventually somebody, although not the people who define.
So I decided that the computing industry really needed binary
prefixes.
So some of you may have seen these, some of
you may know them, but some of you may have
seen them without knowing them.
They are actually a useful thing to know.
So you will see people in computer science and the
other binary oriented subjects talking about Chip, maybe, and Gibby,
meaning multiply by two to the 10,024.
So when we say kilobyte in computer science, we always
mean KiB byte.
Nobody ever means a thousand bytes when they say kilobyte.
Likewise megabytes, likewise gigabytes when you're talking about memory.
But as I said, the disk manufacturers and also the
tape manufacturers used to talk about gigabytes in the sense
of ten to the nine.
So that's just a little side issue.
, incidentally, this is another completely random thing I said.
Tape.
Have any of you ever written files onto a tape
of any kind?
Nobody.
Do you think tape still exists as a storage medium?
Okay, 95% of you are very wrong.
Tape is still the large scale storage medium of choice,
and the capacities increase incredibly every 5 or 10 years.
Which surprised me because even when I was a student
40 years ago, people thought tape was on the way
out.
And 20 years ago people thought tape was definitely dead.
But it just keeps on going mainframes.
So if we've got a way of looking at a
picture with 65 different universes, 64 different universes, and turning
it into a formula, except that I haven't told you
any human comprehensible way of looking at a huge picture
and extracting a formula from it.
So how do we do that?
There are algorithmic ways to simplify Boolean formulae, and we
will be talking about those a little bit later.
But as I said this is engineering.
And engineers are pragmatic people.
And what we're going to talk about now is a
very human way of simplifying a formula.
So what are humans good at?
Humans are not good at a lot of the things
that computers are good at.
We are not good at doing calculations.
We are not good at manipulating large amounts of data.
We are very, very good at spotting patterns in things,
and there are all sorts of good evolutionary reasons for
that.
The evo psych people will tell you, because it's important
to recognise the pattern of a pounce of a tiger
waiting to jump.
And I don't know whether you believe evolutionary psychology, but
I suppose there's probably something in it.
And it's a side issue.
We do have bits in our brain, or at least
do we know that humans do.
We know that other animals have bits in their brain
that respond to specific patterns, patterns of vertical stripes,
or even individual clumps of neurones or neurones that do
that.
So it's quite deeply ingrained in our brains, and it's
not a conscious intellectual thing, but pattern recognition is something
we do.
Which is why all these annoying are you a human
things on And websites try to get you to recognise
patterns that have been confused in a way that makes
them hard for machines to do so.
The corner map is a way of drawing out a
truth table and colouring it to make it easy to
pull out a boolean formula, and even better than that,
to pull out a short Boolean formula.
So here's a truth table involving the predicates A and
B.
I think it's probably the one we looked at earlier.
What can we do to try to identify a nice
short formula that describes it?
Do we need to discuss what it means for a
formula to be short?
I mean, technically we should have some definition, but the
number of symbols in it will do for now.
So what we can do is highlight the cells that
are true.
So this is the bits of the universe that can
be inhabited, which in our case was the the left
hand side in the previous picture.
And stare at it and try to cover it by
rectangles.
So this is a bit an IQ test I
suppose, but it's a very easy IQ test.
I can't do IQ tests, so I easy IQ
tests.
If we look at this and try to cover it
by even rectangles.
Now, what do I mean by even rectangles?
I'll tell you a bit, tell you that more precisely
later.
But if you want to cover this L shape by
a couple of rectangles as simply as possible, what are
you going to do?
I could cover it by three, one by one squares.
Right?
But is that the simplest thing to do?
So for some people, it's the simplest.
For others it isn't.
So what's an alternative?
One square off, one square on top and a rectangle
on the bottom.
Now bear in mind that these are boolean values, so
it doesn't matter if I overlap them.
The stem of the L and the leg of the
L.
So we've got several possibilities.
Which one is nice?
So the one I just mentioned is to do that
and that.
, now I claim that that is something that is
particularly short because it gives you a nice short description.
In particular, it gives me the description of the L
in terms of the things that are a so where
is A1 there.
And together with the things that are not B.
So if I cover the L by two rectangles, then
I get a formula coming out which is of the
form A or not B, which I claim is a
nice short formula.
If I did that division, which was one of the
earlier suggestions, the square at the top and the rectangle
along the bottom, what formula would I get out of
it?
Yeah.
I don't see.
I mean, eventually I would.
So how would I get that?
I mean, let's not do anything clever yet.
Let's just describe the picture in front of us.
And or not.
And so I'm trying to describe a single square on
the top, which is defined as not a.
And then I'm trying to describe the rectangle on the
bottom.
Which is a.
, now if you simplify that formula, of course you
get back to the one that we found by covering
it with two rectangles.
But the nice thing about looking for the biggest rectangles
that cover the shape is that you get the short
formula out by staring at that, rather than by having
to do simplification.
Notice by the way, that when I try to describe
a single square in this diagram, I have to talk
about two variables because I'm identifying one cell in a
two dimensional array.
When I talk about a row, then I only need
to mention one variable.
So the bigger the rectangle I'm describing, the fewer variables
I have to specify to say what it is, and
that makes for short formulae.
So that's why we look for the largest even rectangle.
I said I'd tell you what I mean by an
even rectangle.
I don't actually mean that it has an even number
of cells in it.
I mean that its width and height are powers of
two so that it divides.
It's either half a table or quarter of a table,
or an eighth of a table, so that it covers
one particular variable value.
.
Okay.
We should, , make sure that we've got this two
variable case sorted out.
So do you see what we're doing?
Should we do another example?
Yes.
.
Let's call.
It.
C and D.
No it's not.
Call it C and D, let's call it p and
q this time.
Sorry.
My ones are becoming more and more continental.
Sure.
, what truth table shall we do?
Something could do.
Something perverse.
.
Trouble is, they're all rather boring.
Somebody give me one.
Somebody just read out for binary digits.
Say for binary digits to me.
The identity function.
Equality function.
Now, that's a nasty one.
Why is it a nasty one?
It doesn't have any interesting rectangles.
It just has one by one squares.
So if we tediously do it.
What formula do we get out?
So people at the front sort of keep quiet for
a moment, because the other people need to think for
a bit.
Okay.
Can anybody at least halfway back shout out a formula?
For.
Okay.
Not P and not Q.
That describes that single cell there or P and Q
which describes that soul there.
So that's an ugly shape.
It has a long formula.
Okay.
There are of course 16 possible examples we can do.
I'm not sure it's useful to go through too many
more of them, but the basic principle is hopefully reasonably
clear.
It's about to get a bit more exciting because it's
a rare situation that, you know, you only have four
variables.
I mean, actually in modern world, it's a rare situation
that you only have any reasonable number of variables.
But this is back in the old days of manual
circuit design.
So just before I go on, any immediate questions about
what's going on here?
Okay.
Engineers extended this up to four.
In fact, they extended it up to six or even
eight variables.
But that's actually more than my brain can cope with.
So we're going to stick to four variables.
How can we write down a truth table for four
variables.
So if you think about what a truth table for
four variables ought to look , it ought to be
a four dimensional table.
And we are not terribly good at writing down and
visualising four dimensional tables.
And some of you may possibly have tried how many
people had an obsessive phase of drawing hyper cubes?
Nobody sad.
It's when you try to draw the hyper, hyper hyper
cues that it gets exciting.
You get pretty patterns.
, and just as a side, if you I did
once visit A computer science stroke electronics department, which had
an immersive four dimensional display navigation system where you could
walk into this planetarium room and steer yourself around
a four dimensional universe.
It was a seasick inducing.
So what I've done here is write down a four
dimensional truth table by clumping together two of the variables.
So I've got A and B, and I'm writing down
combined values.
So A is zero, B is zero, a is zero,
b is one as b as one, b is one,
and so on.
Similarly, along the top I've written down combined values of
two variables c and d.
Now you'll notice that I have not written these values
in the natural order.
So I've gone in.
Normally you would expect to go 00011011 because that's how
we count.
At least it's how we count when we've mastered binary,
which hopefully you all did many years ago.
Instead, I've written them in this order, and this is
a very clever and nice little trick.
So the phrase for writing things in this order is
writing them as a grey code, which Wikipedia will tell
you more about if you want to know.
, the nice thing about it is that as you
move from one column to another, only one variable is
changing its values.
So when I move from zero to 0 to 0,
one d is changing.
When I move from zero 1 to 1 one, then
C is changing.
When I move from one 1 to 1 zero, then
D is changing.
, why is that nice?
It partly makes the extraction of rectangles easier, and also
it avoids a problem that is important in circuit design,
which is race conditions.
So those of you who are doing hardware are going
to come across race conditions and we will see.
We will mention briefly at the end of this section
how this grey code stuff helps you with that.
, so what am I going to do?
Well, I can do things identify a region.
So here is a rectangle.
It's an even rectangle.
And this is characterised by the variable a being one.
So if you look at the rows here, it's the
rows where a is one and c and d or
anything.
What happens if I want to look at the region
where b is one.
I get that.
So again if I look at the region where B
is one, I get a nice contiguous rectangle.
And this wouldn't happen if I wrote these combined values
in the usual order.
So something you should do after the lecture is convince
yourself of that.
Write out the truth table in the usual order and
see how you wouldn't get nice rectangles.
So this describes the region where b is one.
And similarly this is the region where c is one,
and this is the region where d is one.
So any place where one variable takes on A a
true value is nicely described by a two by four
rectangle in the table.
But of course we also want to think about what
happens when variables are false, because we might need to
describe a universe in which variables take false values.
And at first sight, it might look as if this
isn't going to work so nicely.
So if I look at.
The.
Places where A is zero light pink, then I get
this nice two by four rectangle.
Okay.
But if I want to look at the places where
B is zero, I get that.
And at first sight that's not a two by four
rectangle.
Last time we had a discussion about geometry.
So here's some geometry.
The keyword is in the title of the slide.
On what surface?
If we do this to this truth table on a
suitable surface, we could make this thing be actually a
rectangle.
, and now I get to the question who remembers
what a torus is?
Okay, who thinks they should remember what a torus is
and who is quite sure they've never heard the word.
Okay, a torus is a ring doughnut.
Okay.
, I don't know why mathematicians can't call it.
I suppose because doughnut is an ambiguous word.
There are wing doughnuts, and there are proper doughnuts with
a hole in the middle and jam that squirts out.
But if we draw the truth table on a torus
on a ring doughnut, then both the zero values and
the one values are rectangles.
So the same happens with c and d.
, this is where c is zero and this is
where d is zero.
And the way we think about it is this.
So values wrap around from the beginning.
They wrap around from the right to the left.
So if I go right from here I end up
here.
If I go up from here I end up at
the bottom and so on and so on.
And there is a picture which I googled up because
I don't know any graphics package well enough to draw
a coloured torus, but fortunately somebody else does.
, So this is a picture of the truth table
with slightly different colours drawn on a torus.
So I've got red and blue and green and yellow
instead of my colours, but roughly it matches.
So this is strictly speaking it's due to a two
dimensional geometry, but it's two dimensional geometry on an interestingly
curved surface.
And many of us are not very good at thinking
about these things.
, I have lousy geometrical visualisation capacities.
, in fact, the other day I found a courier's
report from when I was 16, which said I had
lousy spatial visualisation capacities.
It's still true.
But fortunately, we can look at it, look at truth
tables and do it more diagrammatically.
, any questions at this point?
I think examples are what we need to see how
to do this successfully, what I need it.
I, by the way, knew none of this before I
started teaching the course because not being an actual computer
scientist by origin, I managed to avoid this bit of
electronics.
, so here's a four dimensional truth table.
It has a bunch of zeros and it has a
bunch of ones.
This is an easy one.
What's the easiest rectangle that describes it?
I mean, it's.
The simplest possible thing, the square in the middle.
And somebody said that's B and D.
Why is it B and D.
Because this is where B is one and this is
where d is one.
okay.
So far so good.
That was what we got that everybody see that?
No.
Anybody worried about it?
Not quite sure.
Okay.
Here's another one.
Also straightforward.
Yeah.
Mhm.
Be a Nazi.
So just look at the rectangle.
Look at the rows that describe it.
It's the rose where B is one.
Look at the columns that describe is the rose where
c is zero.
so that's a nice easy case.
We're going to do another couple of easy cases before
getting on to slightly more challenging ones.
What about this one?
This is also something where there are four true souls,
but now they're laid out all in a row instead
of in a nice little square.
Does that make a difference to how complex the formula
is?
Not really.
, that's my rectangle I'm trying to cover.
And if I try to describe it, it's this row,
which is where A is zero and B is zero.
So this is described by not A and not be.
Okay.
Any questions so far.
Anybody not follow any of these.
And is willing to admit it which is always the
hard part.
What about this one.
Mhm.
So again, looking looking at the people a few rows
back, how many rectangles are there to cover?
Okay, lots of people are getting it good.
So this is the tricky one where we say looks
there are two rectangles, but there's only one because
this can wrap around.
And actually we just have a square again.
And this is the cute bit.
So this is just a and sorry not A and
not D.
By the same principle.
This rectangle here which wraps round is where a
is zero and d is false.
Okay.
So that's more or less it.
It's not quite it.
There's a couple of other cases.
So everybody see that one now.
Because if you see this one then essentially you're done.
Yeah yeah.
Anybody.
Not yet see it.
I'm willing to say so.
That's right.
We're going to be done with week six, but maybe
not quite.
.
Okay, so here's a slightly more complex example.
Now we have two rectangles apparently.
Can we do anything about this or do we just
have to say we have two rectangles.
And if we have two rectangles what's the formula that
comes out of it?
Well, yeah.
So if we have two things to deal with, then
we need to all them together, as we did with
that example there.
We had two one by one cells and we ored
them together.
Here we can't do anything clever.
We just have to recognise that there's a two by
two cell and a two by two cell here.
They don't overlap, they're just completely distinct.
So the shortest sensible description or the shortest description we
can obviously extract of this table is the red cells
or the green cells which are not A and not
C or A and C.
Everybody happy with that.
Yeah.
So here's the one that sometimes catches people.
How many rectangles?
One.
Yeah.
Yep.
I'm just looking at some people to see if they're
going to change their minds as they hear other people.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
So I think we have quite a lot of votes
for one.
Why do we have quite a lot of votes for
one?
Because this is the tricky thing.
The torus bends meets itself both ways that way and
that way.
So the four corners are actually all next to each
other.
So this is a single two by two cell.
And if you look at the description of it then
you can see that it's where in fact where
is it.
It's where.
C d is zero and d is zero because it's
those two columns and , b is zero because it's
those two rows.
So not b and not d.
.
That's probably quite tricky.
And notice again we've found in this diagram we found
a single two by two cell.
So we've got a nice short formula with just two
variables in it.
So of course this is a general thing.
If we see a one by one cell we get
a variable with four things anded together.
If we saw a one by two cell, we would
have three variables added together.
When we see a two by two cell, we get
two variables and so on.
Right.
So that's the complex toroidal one.
I'm happy with that.
Anybody not see what we're doing there?
Willie, I should come in with a flotation aid.
Appropriately coloured.
, what about this one?
So now things are getting a little bit more complex,
and you might need to ponder this one for a
bit.
What a natural ways to.
There are quite a few different ways we could cover
this with rectangles.
The question is, which one is a good one or
which ones might we try?
Probably.
You have several possibilities.
, was anybody thinking of this one?
So this looks pretty straightforward, right?
We're looking for even rectangles.
We've got a column of two there.
We've got a column of two there.
And we've got a column sorry a square here.
And if we describe each of them in turn we
get not a not c, not d, b, not c,
d and a c as descriptions of the three squares
there.
, in this particular case, there isn't anything better we
can do.
We could cover it with a different assortment of rectangles,
perhaps, but it wouldn't make any difference.
So now.
Let's think about something a little bit more complex.
Have a look at this one.
And think about what's the obvious thing to do.
Who thinks this is the obvious thing to do?
I think it's the obvious thing to do.
.
Anybody think it's not the obvious thing to do?
Okay.
What's the obvious thing to do?
Okay, so.
Ah, but we can't do that because three is not
an even rectangle.
So we can't go that and that because that would
give us a three by one which isn't allowed.
So rectangles with sides that are powers of two.
This seems the obvious thing to do.
What happens if we do that?
We get a nasty long formula because it's describing a
single cell in here.
So this cell is described by A and B and
not c and d.
And then this square is described by a and c.
So we all them together.
And if we get a formula with six symbols in
it could we do any better.
Could we be a little bit sneaky and make the
formula slightly shorter?
The one in the middle who just had it be
a rectangle.
Mhm.
Let's see if anybody else further back can come up
with that.
Yeah.
If we overlap things we can do a little bit
better.
So this is legitimate, perfectly fine for things to be
overlapping because we're oring all these things together.
So it doesn't matter if we cover a particular cell
twice.
And by having this redundant cell here, we have saved
one variable in this pink clause and turned it from
a four variable clause into a three variable clause, which
doesn't sound a big deal, but when you're doing
this on a much larger scale, then it becomes useful.
And also for sheer human comprehensibility, 2 or 3 years
about our limit.
.
That is actually all I wanted to say about carnal
maps before we go and talk about what we're actually
doing when we do carnal maps.
So after this, we're going to go on and talk
about symbolic manipulations of formulae which are doing the same
thing algorithmically and deterministically.
So kernel maps are great, but what's the defect?
The defect is they are using human pattern matching capabilities,
which computers by definition do not have.
We can program them in, but it's a bit of
well, I suppose these days someone has almost certainly made
a large language model that looks at a truth table
and does tries to into a kernel map.
In fact, you lot probably use ChatGPT and friends all
the time, right?
So those of you who use any of you using
one with visual capabilities yet, okay, have a play.
See whether it can do corner maps.
Most likely it can, because there's a fairly small.
I have better things to do with my life than
use ChatGPT, so I'm going to leave it to you
to do that.
, before we finish any questions about this?
Yeah.
So can I have some quiet for the question, please?
So it.
Is.
What?
It is.
.
So you mean the lectures are a bit out of
sync?
Because this is a, .
That's just because I'm.
I slowed down a bit, and we might as well
get ahead a bit, because then if anything goes wrong,
we don't have to have an extra lecture to catch
up.
So I'm in two minds about what to do next
week, so I will continue with the week six material
on Thursday.
On Friday, depending on the negotiation I'm having with Don,
there are a couple of possibilities.
I could give you the day off, or I could
do a voluntary lecture on something more sophisticated for whoever
feels turning up.
, whatever.
So I'll think about it and decide.
See you.
, see you on Thursday.