Okay.
Good afternoon.
The show.
You'll all be glad to know that I tested negative
this morning, which is why I'm not wearing a mask.
And so this lecture should be a lot more comfortable
than yesterday's lecture was for all concerned.
, so yesterday I talked largely about contra position and
the different ways in which we can apply contra position.
Earlier in the week, we applied it to sequence, and
now we've been applying it to syllogisms and generating more
syllogisms.
And we've been generating existential syllogisms where we say, ,
aid is not entail C, which means that there is
an A that is not C, so that makes it
existential statements.
I left you a few things to think about.
Not particularly going to go through them because they were
supposed to be fodder for the tutorials.
What I want to do today is wrap up with
syllogisms.
So we will go back to categorical propositions.
Think about them a little bit more.
Think about how we've derived one syllogism from another, and
have a look at the complete set of available valid
syllogisms that we can use, and finish off with a
comment about the thing that I've mentioned a few times
so far, the existential assumption, and I'll explain a bit
more about how that works and why it was a
bit of a mess for Aristotle.
So any questions from yesterday?
Any questions about this composition stuff?
The syllogisms we introduced yesterday with existential statements in them.
Okay.
So let's go back and think a little bit about
the categorical propositions.
So when I introduced categorical propositions.
I said they had the form every or no is
B or not B, and the reason we've been looking
at them is that they're more general than propositional logic
because they have quantifiers every or no or some, but
they are not as powerful as full first full first
order logic, which is too much to cope with.
And we've seen several forms of categorical statement.
We've seen every human is mortal.
We've seen the opposite of it.
No human is immortal, and we've seen existential statements.
, some human is Greek, some human is not Greek.
And for Aristotle and the tradition that grew up from
Aristotle until the 19th century.
These were considered to be the four canonical forms of
categorical proposition, and they were given English or Greek and
Latin originally Greek, of course, later Latin, and then later
English terms called universal affirmative because it's a universal statement
about everything, and it's affirmative because it's saying something positive.
Every A is B universal negative, which is talking about
everything and making a negative statement.
No, A is B, and the traditional terms in English
here were particular because you're asserting that there is one
particular a that has the property B or here some
particular A that has the property, not B, and we
represented them in Venn diagrams.
So we have the shading here to say where something
is not happening.
There are no A's that are not B, there are
no A's that are a B and noticed that I'm
negating and flipping around.
And here we assert the existence of some particular object
which sits in A and B.
And here we assert the existence of something that sits
in A, not B.
And notice that the diagonal statements contradict each other.
So if every A is B that contradicts the statement
that some A is not B, and similarly these contradict.
, the observant amongst you will have seen this bit
in small print up here, which says that these are
not exactly Aristotle's categorical propositions.
So if you haven't looked ahead at the next slide,
can you guess why it's not exactly.
, you see.
Yeah.
Maybe because there's negations.
, because there's negation.
So the negation is Aristotelian.
So on the left side, Aristotle didn't negation, but
on the right side it was okay.
The existentialism.
Well, I said I was going to talk about the
existential assumption, didn't I?
So that's why.
So.
This is something that some of you have also been
tempted to assume.
There have been various questions on Piazza.
I think too many of them were private questions.
And let me again discourage private questions unless you're really
revealing your solution.
, in everyday English, it's a bit unclear what I
mean, if I say.
, let me think of a plausible example.
Does the statement all mice are vermin?
imply the existence of mice?
Yeah.
What do you think?
This is just a question about language.
Okay, what about the statement?
All unicorns have one horn.
Am I committing to the existence of unicorns?
I mean, somewhere, but not in this universe, I hope.
, so Aristotle was a bit of a realist.
He thought that it was simply nonsense to talk about
things that don't exist.
Why would you want to talk about things that don't
exist?
And of course, in a Greek setting that made for
some interesting political and religious issues.
If you say.
All the gods have short tempers that could get you
into trouble in several different ways.
I mean, the Greeks were not too big on the
importance of believing in gods, but nonetheless, gods were real
for many of them, but maybe not for the intellectual
elite.
It's unclear, but you could still get into trouble for
denying the existence of gods.
, so when Aristotle was working out the details of
his theory, he reckoned that if I say all A
or B, then that requires me also to commit to
the fact that there is such a thing as an
A.
So for Aristotle, if you say every a is B,
that also implies that some A is B, whereas in
modern logic we take the view that for all statements
are true when there aren't any of the thing you're
talking about.
And that's one of the things that often confuses people
in logic.
The reason we do it is because everything simply works
much more nicely.
I'll come back to this at the end to illustrate
further that it works much more nicely.
So this is just historical information.
You will see the modern version of for all and
universal quantification in any book.
After about 1850, I think.
But if you ever go and look at medieval logic,
, it is possible still to learn medieval logic.
There is a Catholic university in Hungary which still teaches
people medieval logic.
, but that's probably about it.
So I want to go back and think about syllogisms
again and Venn diagrams, and think of some slightly more
complex syllogisms.
We haven't talked much about existential syllogisms and how they
interact with universal statements.
So here is an example of a syllogism involving universal
statements and particular statements.
So the one I have in mind is no mathematician
is infallible.
And some programmers are mathematicians.
And I claim that from these two statements it follows
that some programmers are fallible.
Do you agree that that's a sound piece of reasoning?
And as always, if I'm using any word that hasn't
entered your vocabulary because people who wrote the book have
a very wide vocabulary shout.
And if you're one of the people who wants to
know whether infallible is the same as not fallible, yes
it is.
Despite the fact that inflammable is not the same as
not flammable.
So if this is a sound piece of reasoning, how
can we show that it's a sound piece of reasoning?
Well, you can try to argue by direct logic.
Another way you can show that it's direct is to
start from Barbara and manipulate Barbara by doing contra positions
to it until you end up with this.
And we reckon that doing contra position is a sound
way of turning one syllogism into another.
So if we can start from Barbara and mess around
with contra positions and get this, we think it's reasonable
and you should do that exercise.
I think you probably have to do it in the
tutorial anyway, but even if you don't, you should do
it.
But we can also use the Venn diagram approach to
convince ourselves that this is true.
So let me show you that again because it's an
exercise that we will do.
So control is not B this is the diagram for
that premise says there's nothing in the middle.
So C entails not B is the same as b
entails, not C it's the symmetrical one.
There's nothing that is both B and c.
This is the diagram for A does not entail c.
This says there is something in the middle that is
something that is both A and C.
If we plug these things together we get a diagram
that looks that.
So this grey shading is carried over here.
This existential thing has carried over here.
Now, this is where the diagrams get a little bit
ambiguous.
Is this central diagram an unambiguous representation of the merge
of these two diagrams?
Do you see.
Anything where I've been, where there's some imprecision there that
really I ought to tidy up.
Sorry.
The order.
No.
The, .
If the order in the order is fine, it doesn't
really matter.
So.
Yeah.
So are you asking why is he in the middle?
C is in the middle because it is the middle
term.
It's the term that joins the two premises.
That's a good point.
So I think I haven't said that explicitly, but when
you draw these diagrams.
The way we draw them, we put on the top
the variable that is in both the two premises and
here that is C and C.
It's not those two, it's the one that is shared.
So that's a good point.
But I've done something in the diagram which isn't completely
justified when I merged.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So in here I put an x and that x
is representing an object anywhere in this region okay.
Whereas down here I've left the x where it is.
But actually the x could also be in there.
Now that's okay because this region is shaded.
And therefore I know that there isn't an X in
there.
And therefore the x that was in this region must
actually be in the right hand half of it.
But that's a little argument that I have to make.
And it's quite a subtle one, so you might miss
it.
Okay, what happens when I pull out the C?
I'm expecting to get a premise that a diagram that
corresponds to that.
Well, I do, because if I pull out the C,
then I get left with two partially shaded regions and
the white paint spills over and all the shaded regions
disappear.
And the X is still sitting in here somewhere, which
now corresponds to this region.
And so I get a diagram that corresponds to the
conclusion.
Some programmer is fallible.
Assert the existence of a programmer who is not fallible.
Questions about that.
It's a slightly more sophisticated diagram, proof than than one
we've done before because of these little things that you
have to think about on the way.
So anybody.
Yeah.
So what.
Does it mean to be in a if somebody is
not in the.
Area.
So if where are we.
You mean back up here.
So up here.
Well X is in a right.
So this is some a is C.
Remember when you have the the negated thing A does
not entail not c means some a is C which
is always very hard to remember.
But if you think of it you can either think
about it each time, which is what I end up
doing, or you can try to learn it.
So.
Yeah.
It's not impossible.
How do we compare?
Does not entail to.
Or so which.
Which thing in Haskell or so or in Haskell is
the or of a list, right.
So if you are implementing does not entail then yes,
you would be using an Or when you've got lots
of premises on either side.
But we haven't got on to having lots of premises
on either side yet, so we will get on to
that.
, so more generally that's a comment about duality, which
I've mentioned.
So, or is the dual of the.
And if you take a big and of things and
you apply negation to that, you get the or of
the negation inside.
We will see a lot of that later, but not
yet.
Okay, so let me give you one to think about.
So here is a putative syllogism.
, and at this point, I to do another
of my little linguistic surveys, because this is quite a
slow lecture and I have plenty of time to do
random things.
So there is this word I'm going to give you
three pronunciations of it, and I want to know who
uses which pronunciation.
So who says fungi?
Okay.
Who says fungi and who says fungi?
Good grief.
Okay, congratulations.
.
A fungi is a very old pronunciation.
It's so old that even I don't use it.
So I'm curious where you got it from.
What's your linguistic background?
Dunno.
Maybe you heard some 19th reading of a 1930s book.
, why did people say fungi?
, because back in the day, Latin words in English
were pronounced as if they were English.
So in normal English spelling, g before I or e
is soft, therefore fungi and the letter ie is pronounced
ie, so hence fungi.
.
After the First World War, when we were Latins, teaching
in schools was changed and they started trying to use
actual Latin pronunciation, and that kind of permeated its way
through into normal, everyday English, with the result that we
are now completely confused about where the Latin words in
English should be pronounced in a Latin way, in English
way, or something horribly in between.
So generally we do something horribly in between, fungi
instead of fungi.
So here is the alleged syllogism.
All plants are.
What am I, fungi?
Some flowers are not plants.
Some.
Therefore some flowers are not fungi.
Is that a valid piece of reasoning?
I forget about whether any of the statements are true
or not.
I heard an answer.
I have some more answers.
Somebody thinks it is a valid piece of reasoning, right?
Two.
Okay.
Three.
Okay.
Any more votes for no.
Somebody shouted no.
Yep.
Okay.
That leaves an awful lot of people who haven't worked
it out yet.
, it gets tricky, doesn't it?
So three short sentences, and we have to think quite
hard about whether this is a sensible piece of reasoning
or something that you might hear in an election address.
Let's see if we can actually work it out from
the Venn diagram.
So I'm going to do the same thing.
I'm going to do the merge.
And this time I'm going to be more careful about
this x.
So over here I have a entails b.
So that means everything that is A is also.
B there's nothing in here.
Over here I have some C is not a.
So that's asserting the existence of an X in here.
And now when I merged the diagrams I'm going to
be more careful.
I know this x is in here, but I don't
know whether it's in here or in here.
There might be X's in both places, but all I
know for certain is that there is at least one
X in this region.
So there could be one in here, or there could
be one in here.
So what do I get if I pull out the
A?
If I pull out the A then what changes the
white paint spills into here.
So this region is now white.
Nothing is empty.
And what I don't know is that there's an X
here, because I still only know that there might be
X in the middle here or here.
So I don't have this red x solidly.
It might be over there.
However this conclusion C does not entail B that says
some C is not B.
Requires me to demonstrate that there is definitely an X
in this region.
I don't have a demonstration.
This x might be sitting over here, so I have
failed to establish a diagrammatic proof.
And from there I can go on to construct an
actual example.
So if the x is here in the middle, then
the conclusion doesn't match what I have here.
So what I'm going to try to do is construct
a universe in which there is an X sitting in
this middle region here, and that will satisfy the premise,
because it'll be down here and it will satisfy the
second premise because it will be down here, but it
won't satisfy the conclusion.
And where I'm going to do that is just invent
a universe.
So when you're looking for counterexamples, you can invent any
universe you .
So I'm going to say there's a thing called a
quants.
And let's assume that it's a fungus and a flower,
which is botanical nonsense.
But that doesn't matter because we can create whatever universe
we .
And it's not a plant.
So the quants is sitting.
Where is the quants sitting in there?
And let's say the universe contains exactly one quants.
So what does the syllogism say?
All plants are fungi.
Well, this universe doesn't have any plants in it, so
that's true.
Some flowers are not plants.
We have a cancer, which is a flower and not
a plant.
So that's true.
The conclusion claims that some flowers are not fungi, but
we only have one flower and it is a fungus
because we've only got the quants.
So we've constructed a universe in which this syllogism fails
to be valid.
Go back.
Yeah.
And therefore, the syllogism fails to be found in all
universes.
We found one particular universe in which it fails.
Okay.
If you want to go away.
And.
Yeah.
Let's go from there.
.
So if.
Replace which?
Which?
Instead of.
All plants are fungi.
If we said all fungi are plants.
You're now asking me to prove a syllogism in my
head in front of you, aren't you?
Which is a mean and sadistic.
Shall we do it on the board?
That means, shall you do it on the board?
, so I won't ask anybody to come up and
draw, but you can tell me what to draw.
So we are now looking.
For.
.
I'm sorry.
I'm not supposed to write that far over.
because the people looking online can't see it.
Sorry about that.
So we're not messing with the right hand statement.
What's the middle one?
Eh?
Okay, so what does the left hand diagram look
now?
Somebody shout a bit louder.
Tell me what to do.
I'm just an automaton.
Shade this bit.
Right.
B entails a if there's nothing in B that is
not a.
So if I do the merge.
I have an x that might be here.
Or might be there.
And I have some shaded stuff.
Which shades out the x that might be there.
So that's no longer a problem.
So it looks to me as if it's now valid.
Because this X now has to be over there.
, to I agree, if all plants are fungi.
And some flowers are not plants, then it does indeed
follow that some flowers are not fungi.
Good.
So the diagram and human logic agree.
Okay.
So you will get some exercises on this in the
tutorial.
And I have a fourth year student trying multiple fourth
year students trying to write something that can read your
answers to these and work out whether they're correct or
not, because your poor tutors have a very hard time
looking at your graphical diagrams and deciding whether they were
correct answer to the question or not.
And if you thinking about these things, you might
to think about why is it hard to mark
diagram questions?
Okay.
Any questions about this?
Further questions.
Okay.
So that was diagrams I want to go back to
something a bit easier to handle.
We have talked about several ways of taking a syllogism,
such as Barbara and doing stuff to it in order
to get another syllogism.
So something we did right at the beginning was substitution.
We said, if you've got A, B and C, you
can substitute anything you for A, B and C,
and you still get a syllogism.
In particular, we could substitute not B for B and
still get a syllogism.
Unlike Aristotle, we had double negation.
Cancellation goes double, negations cancel.
we had contra position within a sequent.
So if I have A entails B, I know that
not B entails not A and vice versa.
And we did contra position between the conclusion and one
of the premises.
So here I've done contra position between this conclusion and
this premise to get a new syllogism.
Now these processes that we do are all things that
you can do backwards.
So if you substitute one thing for another, you can
substitute the original back in again.
Double negation works both ways.
Contra position works both ways.
If I can't propose this or contraption it according to
taste, you get back to there.
Similarly, if I take this and contra pose it again,
I get back to there.
So these are symmetrical processes means they also have the
nice property that as well as turning a sound syllogism
into an unsound syllogism.
They saw a sound syllogism into a sound syllogism.
They also turn an unsound syllogism into an unsound syllogism.
So if you find yourself needing to come up with
lots of examples of unsound syllogisms.
For example, if you're trying to set tutorial exercises, then
you can generate them by applying these rules to any
existing one.
Instantly.
If this piece of logic is not immediately obvious to
you, you should go away and think about it until
it becomes obvious.
It's not a trivial piece of reasoning, but it's a
simple piece of reasoning.
And if you don't see why this sentence makes sense,
then please ask.
Okay, here are all the syllogisms that are sound.
So if you look in the book, you'll see this
table laid out.
, my spacing is a bit off, isn't it?
I should do something about that.
Make it a bit more elegant.
So we have one, two, three, four, five by 315
sound syllogisms.
In our modern view of the world.
I mean, this is a semi Aristotelian view of the
world because we're we're allowing we're separating negated predicates on
the right from positive predicates on the right.
So here we have the universal affirmative.
Here we have the universal negative.
So these are the 15 syllogisms that Aristotle thought was
sound and that we also think are sound.
If you were learning this 500 years ago, you would
now be well, you would already some time ago have
memorised this little rhyme.
Not exactly a rhyme, is it?
It's a verse because it doesn't rhyme.
But.
At some point I will tell you in an entirely
voluntary way what all this stuff means.
It really is quite fun.
So here are 15 principles of sound reasoning about categorical
statements.
And these are the only principles of sound reasoning about
categorical statements.
If you see anybody trying to do reasoning that is
not one of these, then it is wrong.
So let me go back to a reprise.
This is the end of syllogisms.
So what have we done in the process of working
up to see logistic reasoning.
We started by defining the notion of proposition, which is
a Boolean true or false thing.
We generalised it to talk about predicates, which is a
proposition that talks about things.
So you can say the moon is full.
We introduce the idea of categorical proposition, which is a
relation between two predicates.
Saying that one of them applies implies the other.
Either for everything in the universe or for something in
the universe, and either affirmatively or negatively.
Although in the modern logical view we don't really care
about affirmative or negative.
We introduced a modern notation.
So this is a much nicer notation than the Aristotelian
notation.
And we write it as a entails B or a
does not entail b.
We showed that we can interpret these things in Venn
diagrams, and we saw ways of reasoning with Venn diagrams
to check that.
An alleged syllogism is either sound or wrong.
So a syllogism takes two premises and hit derives a
conclusion.
, a thing that has come up a couple of
times.
Let's repeat it.
The way we are looking at syllogisms, it doesn't really
matter what the order of the premises is.
, I don't have one written up, but we write
one premise on the left.
One on the right makes no difference to us.
In the traditional medieval, classical, medieval view, there is a
distinction between the two.
It's not important.
It was the way they were thinking at the time
when they tried to systematise it, but it has no
logical importance.
And we can check things.
So that sums up what we've done with categorical propositions
and Venn diagrams.
And also some rules.
So the final thing we did was to say we
have ways of manipulating a syllogism by applying operations to
it.
Substitution double negation called proposition.
, if I said go away, implement syllogisms, implement contra
position.
Implement double negation cancellation in Haskell.
Can you do it?
So a few people are confident that they can.
Who is currently confident that they cannot?
Okay, that's a very uncommitted, unusually uncommitted bunch.
Well, you're going to anyway, right?
So you will find that actually it's quite easy.
And also it's quite useful because there are a bunch
of examples in this stuff.
And writing this stuff by hand is horrible.
We have computers to do this stuff, so making sure
that the examples are correct is much easier to do
after you've implemented the stuff in Haskell.
So this will be coming up in tutorials for your
future enjoyment.
, before I get on to the final closing comment
about the existential assumption, any questions about anything we've done
in the last couple of weeks about syllogisms and categorical
propositions?
Okay, yeah.
It's going to be pretty bad.
So is there always for you?
, that's a good question.
, the question was, will there always be three circle
Venn diagrams rather than four circle Venn diagrams or five
circle Venn diagrams?
I realise I've lost the people on line again.
I'm sorry.
, is that a valid piece of reasoning?
Yeah, it's just a chain.
But we don't really need to write things this
because we can combine That and that using techniques that
we will currently just treat as normal mathematics.
But we will later in the course, see how you
can do this kind of thing formally so that you
can plug together chains of reasoning.
So yes, Aristotle could have gone looking at syllogisms with
more than two premises, but he never did, and nor
did anybody else until later.
Well, until after we'd stopped doing syllogisms and done more
powerfully and started working in modern logic.
And indeed, we will be talking about that fairly soon.
.
Okay, so let me finish by saying a bit more
about this existential assumption.
So we've told you a lot about Aristotelian logic.
I knew almost nothing about Aristotelian logic before I started
teaching this course.
It's been an educational experience.
I have even gone back and read some Aristotle, which
is an even more educational experience, and for good measure.
I even tried to compare the Greek original with the
English translation, in case this weird thing that was happening
was something I didn't understand.
I don't actually know ancient Greek, so that was a
pointless activity, but quite fun because you live in a
world in which the manuscripts are online and you can
look at transcripts of Aristotle's works, whereas in my day
I would have had to go to the university library
and navigate the twisty maze of passages.
, so as I said, he didn't believe in talking
about non-existent things.
When you say when you make a universal statement, you
are also asserting a particular statement.
If you make this assumption, then there are more syllogisms
that become valid.
So this is the one we've seen before.
No reptiles have fur.
All snakes are reptiles.
Some snakes have no fur.
So that sounds a reasonable piece of reasoning to
most people because it says, okay, reptiles don't have fur.
Snakes are reptiles.
Therefore, there are some snakes that don't have fur, and
in fact, all snakes don't have fur.
From our modern point of view, it is not sound
because this is a universal statement.
It says no reptiles have fur.
This is a universal statement.
All snakes are reptiles.
And for us, this does not commit to the existence
of snakes.
So we cannot say there is a snake.
But Aristotle thought that was a silly way to think.
So for him this was a valid syllogism.
Suppose that we want to Analyse the way that Aristotle
thought about syllogisms.
What can we do to extend our modern system with
something that lets us analyse Aristotelian syllogisms for validity?
So for us, this is wrong.
We can construct a universe where it fails.
And the exercises?
You should do that.
It's very simple.
But if we want to prove that it's valid in
Aristotle's world, well, we can add a kind of very
special syllogism.
It's not.
It's not a syllogism.
It's a rule.
So this is a rule that says from nothing at
all, we can infer the fact that A does not
entail not a.
That's a weird thing, right?
A does not entail not a.
What's that doing.
Let me just go.
Anybody at the back?
Too many people at the front.
Okay, somebody at the front.
Meenie.
Miney.
Moe.
Sorry.
Somebody.
I haven't learned all your names yet.
Or even any of your names.
I work on it, so.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So if a does not entail.
Not a.
So suppose A entails not a.
That's weird.
Right.
How can a entail not a a can entail not
a only if there aren't any A's.
And that's where the weirdness of modern logic comes in.
So A entails not a means there aren't any.
A's, and therefore A does not entail not a means
that there is an A, because here is an example
of an A that does not entail not A.
It's inside and it's not outside.
I mean, it can't be inside an outside, but nonetheless
it exists.
So it's a slightly weird quirk of modern logic that
you can write a statement this to say that
there must be at least one a and if we
do that, we can then add that as a premise
to syllogisms and derive some of the Aristotelian syllogisms.
And there is an example of this in the tutorial
exercise.
So you will get to do it.
, let me finish by observing that this is a
modern, An simplified, cleaned up presentation of what was actually
going on.
Because if you really analyse Aristotle's works carefully.
Actually they're contradictory.
So his system is not a sound system according to
the likes of modern logic.
There is a deal of work by historical philosophers or
philosophical historians trying to work out what was going on.
I've tried to read some of it, and I reckon
that Aristotle was just confused.
He just never got it properly sorted out.
And if any of you have a burning urge to
go and read about it, this is the article that
I found most helpful.
Okay, so that brings us to the end of Aristotelian
logic.
I think we will move more into the modern world
next week.