Okay, let's get started.
.
Welcome back to Informatics one cognitive science.
.
I'm sorry, where in this room has a nice organ.
Maybe I can use this in a lecture on music
cognition.
, this is obviously a church.
, Thomas Bayes was a reverend.
We will encounter Thomas Bayes later in the course.
Anyway, , so today's lecture is about cognitive science generally.
, it's it's going to provide an introduction to two
important concepts.
And, , the underlying readings.
Let me quickly explain those.
, as you've probably seen, , there's three readings.
The first one is Aston Martin.
This is a paper arguing for the value of computational
modelling, and this will form the basis of the first
part of today.
And then Haz is.
I don't want to say a blog post, but it's
a summary of one of the books and it's making
the case for cognitive gadgets.
And we'll come back to what that is.
Here the interesting point is about innate ness.
So we'll talk about innate ness a little bit.
And then I'll start introducing language, which will occupy us
for a few more lectures in the coming weeks, and
in particular from the perspective of ineptness.
This paper is a bit more of a long read
and more advanced read, so it's optional, but it talks
about the existence of a critical period for language, so
I'll touch upon that as well in this lecture.
All right.
So cognitive modelling, cognitive technology.
And then about language.
That's sort of the game plan for today.
Just to revise quickly.
Last time we talked about cognitive science in general and
in particular, we talked about it being the signs of
mental representations and processes.
So representation representations are things that store information in a
certain format, typically in a structured format.
And processes are algorithms that operate on those representations.
So these things all go on in our minds, in
our brains, in some form or another.
And that's essentially what we're trying to study here.
So and these processes, they they can transform sensory information,
you know, raw signal that comes in from the retina
for example, into representation.
Or they can just transform representation into other representations, or
they can take representations and turn them into actions.
It can be very small actions, for example eye movements
or bigger ones.
Walking.
Talking.
Moving around in the world.
And we have seen this conundrum here about pizzas.
So let's assume you either get two 12 inch pizzas
or one 18 inch pizza for the same price.
Which one do you choose?
And intuitively, if you ask people, a lot of them
choose the two 12 inch pizzas.
Pizzas.
And Aston Martin that's the the reading, one of the
readings.
They talk about that in a lot more detail.
However, you can easily convince yourself by working out the
area.
So let's assume pizza.
We can abstract it and treat it as a circle.
So work out the area of the circle and the
two pizzas is actually a worse deal than the one
large pizza, because the area is smaller.
And so that is interesting.
This is obviously something that we would to explain.
And Gaston Martin argued that modelling is something that helps
us explain that.
How so?
So we've already implicitly done a tiny little bit of
modelling by computing the radius.
And that's what we see here.
This is the formula for the radius.
Call it phi I.
Where for for the area.
Sorry.
Call it phi I.
Where n is the number of pizzas.
Pi is the constant pi and r squared is the
radius of the pizza squared.
That's just the formula of the area of a circle,
right.
Times n because we have n pizzas.
And then we can assume a decision is made based
on the based on the area.
So call this decision function.
Omega takes the areas of two pizzas, Phi I and
Phi J, and returns the one with a larger area.
So if Phi I.
Is bigger than Phi J, then we return I the
the first pizza.
Otherwise we return J the second pizza.
So this is a very, very simple way of formalising
the intuition here.
And of course we can do one better by writing
a little bit of Python and actually implementing this decision
function.
First of all implementing the computation here computation of the
area.
Then here we apply this to two particular pizzas, the
two 12 inch ones and the the 18 inch one.
And then this is our decision rule right.
And just decides whether the amount of food, the area
of the food is bigger in the first case, in
the second case.
And so this has the advantage of making precise what
our assumptions are.
Right?
We assume that people take the area to decide.
We assume that they have a way of computing the
area, or at least estimating the area.
We also assume that that's the only thing they decide
on, right?
This decision function doesn't have access to anything else.
For example, I don't know the amount of topping might
be interesting, the thickness, the weight and so on.
There might in principle, there might be lots of other
things.
But by by formalising and ultimately implementing this idea of
this way of pizza selection, we have to make our
assumptions explicit.
So this is obviously a trivial example of very, very
simple and uninteresting example, but it illustrates this general point.
And , according to Gaston Martin.
So first of all, what is cognitive modelling?
It takes a verbal description.
So I told you well people compare the area or
people just compare the number of pizzas.
Right.
Intuitively maybe they make this mistake and that's why they
prefer the two pizzas even though the area is small.
So there's a verbal description which we have formalised to
an extent to make it implementable.
Right.
So this is the formalisation which is just a very
small bit of mass.
And then this is an implementation which we can essentially
read off of the the mathematical formulation.
Okay.
And this process is is called computational modelling.
And here is a typo.
Yeah.
So this is, this is supposed to say forces us
to make a theory explicit and to specify its scope,
its assumptions, and its computational repercussions.
, so the theory here is people use the area
to decide or people use the number of pizzas to
decide.
Right.
Those two different competing theories.
, and but by implementing this I need to specify
the scope.
So it only looks at pizzas it doesn't look at
I don't know, it only looks at round pizzas.
If you have square pizzas, it no longer works, for
example.
And also the computational repercussions in this case.
This is a very simple piece of code.
But more complicated models, for example, might require a lot
of computation, a lot of memory, a lot of auxiliary
assumptions, and so on.
All of these I need to make explicit if I
want to implement my theory.
And ultimately this will improve the theory by uncovering aspects
that I've not specified very well.
Right in the verbal statement.
For example, the verbal statement here doesn't necessarily say that
the pizza has to be a circle, but if I
make this explicit and I write down the formula of
the area of the circle, then I need to make
this assumption clear and explicit.
If anything is ambiguous, then then And formalising the theory
will force me to to resolve the ambiguity.
It stops us from just testing hypotheses that seem intuitively
interesting, right?
So without having a clear theory of why this is
the right hypothesis.
So it forces us to work in a theoretical manner.
And that basically constrains the search space, right?
Because if we just test arbitrary hypotheses, then we might
end up, , you know, going down a dead end
and we can't do all the possible experiments that we
can think of.
But if we have a theory, then the theory will
tell us what kind of experiments are useful in the
context of that theory.
And ultimately, this will allow us to generate new hypotheses,
compare existing theories, generate new hypotheses.
So this is the high level idea.
And Aston Martin they break break this down.
So cognitive modelling is a multi-step process in their in
their conceptualisation.
You start with a framework which is sort of a
meta theory, a theory of theories.
Then within that framework you formulate a particular theory, for
example, of pizza selection.
Then you specify this so you make it more explicit.
We did this by providing a mathematical formula.
You implement this.
We did this by providing a bit of Python code.
And then this will generate hypotheses.
So for example it will tell us that.
The it's the area rather than the number of pizzas
that's important or.
Or the weight or something that.
And then that's a hypothesis we can test.
So for example what will happen if we have two
small pizzas and one big pizzas.
But the area is the same, or the area of
the two small pizzas is bigger.
Would people then select the two small pizzas?
Right.
So it generates hypotheses this which we can test.
We can run an experiment.
Ask, ask people what kind of pizzas they prefer.
And this will give us data.
And then as you can see there's errors in both
directions right.
So we start from the framework then go down through
theory specification and so on to data.
Once we have new data we climb back up and
revise our hypothesis depending on what the data says, maybe
modify our implementation and our specification.
Ultimately, if the data doesn't conform with our theory, we
need to we need to change our theory.
Okay.
So it's a circular process operating in both directions.
So to explain this a little bit more what the
individual components are.
So starting with the framework up here.
So framework is basically a conceptual system and is a
meta theory that allows us to, to generate, , more
generate , models and theories for a range of different
phenomena.
And we'll see a number of frameworks in this course.
So we'll actually start with what used to be called
connectionism.
It's now called neural networks or deep learning.
and that is very, very general mechanism for modelling
cognitive processes.
And it has been applied all over the place from
language to vision to more to control lots of cognitive
domains.
And that is not a theory or a model.
That is a framework.
It's a system for building models.
Okay.
And the theory is a particular, , a particular instantiation
of this framework for example, to model food selection or
to model language acquisition, or to model object recognition, whatever
cognitive, , whatever cognitive process you're interested in, you build
a theory.
And initially this is verbally specified, right?
You just talk about it.
Or maybe you have a diagram with boxes and arrows
we saw last time.
So the theory is at that level, it is not
formal yet, but it's within a given framework.
And then based on the theory, which can be, as
I said, described in various ways, could be mathematical, natural
language diagrams and so on, and basically tries to explain
the phenomena that you're trying to explain, to explain, say,
object recognition.
And the specification then is the formal description of the
system.
Right.
So you have your theory, you specify it formally.
And that means you also delineate the scope of what
you do.
And that's quite important.
For example, back to our pizza example.
This only works for round pizzas, right?
We said this because the formula is specified as the
area of a circle.
So it is important to also say what your theory
doesn't do right.
So you have a theory of language acquisition for example.
It doesn't explain the acquisition of numbers or the acquisition
of.
Colour systems or something that, or the acquisition of
object categories.
Or maybe you have a very general theory that explains
all these things, but you need to make clear what
the limits are, what the boundaries are, and what's outside
the realm of your theory.
So that's part of the process of specifying it.
So the theory, relevant claims theory irrelevant additional assumptions, things
that is outside the realm of your theory and inside
the realm of your theory and so on.
And this is very important because it also constrains the
space of, of possible computational models.
And that's the next step, right?
Once you have your theory and you have specified it
sufficiently in sufficient detail, then you can build an implementation.
This is often software code, but it doesn't have to
be.
You could also build a physical model in some.
In some cases that's possible.
Maybe in robotics if you're interested in particular motor control
systems and so on.
But most of the time it's going to be a
piece of software.
And then from that you can derive a hypothesis.
So a hypothesis is a testable statement right.
It's something that you can potentially measure and find out
whether it's true or not.
So an example I gave with the pizzas was that
if you make if you have people compare two small
pizzas and one big pizzas, if you make the small
pizzas large enough so that the area is the same
or bigger than the area of the big pizza, then
they should choose the small pizzas.
So it should flip at some point.
And this is something you can test.
You can get people to compare 12 inch and 18
inch, 14 inch, 18 and 16 inch and 18 inch
and so on and see when do their decisions flip
from big small bits or the big pizza or the
other way around?
Okay, that's a hypothesis that this this happens.
And then I need to, , I need to get
data.
In this case, I can just give people I don't
have to even have to give people pizzas, right?
I can just get them to compare pictures if they
are to scale.
Here's a bunch of pictures of pizzas.
Which ones would you choose?
And then I count how often do people choose one
option over the other?
And that is the the data.
Okay.
Let's look at another example.
And this is sort of already transitioning slowly towards language
acquisition.
And we'll come back to that next week.
So let.
And as I said this is a the process works
in both directions right.
So often you actually don't start with the framework or
the theory.
You start with the data.
So let's start down here and let's assume we have
observed some data.
So this is about children learning learning language.
And they make lots of mistakes.
And we'll come back to that.
And these mistakes are actually very interesting scientifically.
So let's assume the child says I eat it the
Cheerios okay.
It is a irregular verb in English.
The child at this point seems to assume that it's
regular, and that is already a hypothesis, right?
If we say it assumes that it is regular, then
it should say sorry.
He or she should say, eat it.
A lot more than eight, maybe.
Occasionally they use the correct form.
Probably heard it's a high frequency verb, so maybe they've
heard the correct form.
So that is our hypothesis in this case.
And we can implement this very easily.
Right.
Just sort of one line.
One line of code.
We take a verb and we add ed to it.
This is of course, the beauty of assuming all verbs
are regular.
It's a very, very simple process.
And here the, the, , the assumption is the child
doesn't know about irregular verbs yet.
They just add ed if they want to form the
past tense.
So that would be a more that would be a
specification.
Specification.
, the specification is more abstract as you can see
here.
It doesn't And include a function definition or anything
that.
It's a verbal specification of what's going on.
And the theory overall is that.
And again, we'll come back to that is that language
works in terms of words and rules.
So words are things 8 or 8.
And rules are things that stick these words together to
form more complex words eat, eat or to build
sentences.
Okay.
So that is a theory that doesn't only work for
past tense, right?
That is a more general theory that would also work
for, I don't know, parol formation or compounding and other
linguistic phenomena.
Okay.
So that's the theory behind that.
And the general framework is one where we assume that
cognitive processes, they manipulate symbols things rules and discrete
entities verbs and so on.
An alternative would be, for example, the neural networks, where
we just assume it's all basically vectors of numbers and
even words and rules and so on are encoded as
vectors of numbers.
Right.
So these are two competing frameworks that we could use
to explain this.
Okay.
So we have our framework words and rules as a
theory specification.
And then the implementation.
And then of course we can go down the hierarchy
again.
So if we go back so we start from the
data and gone all the way up to the framework.
And now we can use this framework theory, specification and
implementation to generate a new hypothesis that we can hopefully
test by getting some more data.
As I said it's it's an iterative process.
So hypotheses Then let's start with, , other irregular verbs.
Right.
So C should become seed rather than saw and helped.
And help should become help.
Help is regular right.
So we have rather than helping which would be in
a in irregular form.
take taken.
Right.
So we have made two claims here.
Right.
The first one is that this is not just for
the single verb here.
Right.
Remember we've only observed a single verb here.
But we are saying this applies to other verbs as
well.
And it also applies to regular verbs, which kind of
makes sense, but it's something we haven't tested yet.
Okay.
And now we can get data.
We can, I don't know, record children while they speak.
We can check different ages.
Children normally start to speak at the age of two,
approximately so we can record two year olds, three year
olds, four year olds and see if that makes a
difference to our hypothesis.
We can look at irregular verbs, irregular verbs.
We can see if they understand them versus generate them.
There's quite a lot of possibilities then for getting data.
Okay, so I've talked for long enough.
We'll have a quick quiz to look at some of
the concepts I've introduced.
So if you haven't scanned this yet give you a
few minutes to scan it.
Okay.
That's the same barcode.
Okay.
Thank you.
Okay.
Okay.
So this is just a very simple question to check
whether you're paying attention.
So, , we have seen the pizza example, and we
have seen a little Python program that decides whether 1
or 2 pizzas should be preferred.
Is this a framework, an implementation or a specification?
Okay.
So please vote now.
Okay.
Let's see.
Yay!
Implementation.
Most of you got that right.
Then a t test.
Does anyone know what the t test is?
I can quickly explain.
Okay.
A few people don't know.
A t test is a statistical test that is used
in psychology to decide whether two meanings are the same.
Let's assume I do this pizza experiment, and I count
how often people take two pizzas.
How often do they take one pizza?
Then I get two to count two averages, and the
t test will tell me whether those two averages are
reliably different or whether they're the same.
So it's a statistical test used to analyse data.
And now in the guessed and margin framework is the
t test the hypothesis?
Is it data or is it a specification.
What do you think?
Yeah.
Okay.
Data is the correct answer, though about half of you
are unsure.
, it is interesting because it's not raw data, right?
It's not individual observations or individual measurements.
It's some statistic you've computed on the data, but it's
still data.
It doesn't.
The T test is theoretically neutral, right?
It doesn't impose any models or theories or hypotheses.
Okay.
So that's why it would count as data even though
it is not the raw observation.
Okay.
Last one.
So we have looked a little bit at irregular verbs.
Let's assume we look at plural formation, which also is
interesting in English because it has some regular some irregular
form.
Dog dogs.
But sheep.
Sheep.
, if we have a verbal description, something you
add an s to the end of the noun.
Would that be a hypothesis, a theory or a specification?
It's a verbal description of how people form the plural
of English nouns.
Okay.
Matt.
Interesting.
So about an equal even split between theory and specification.
I think it's a specification because it is sufficiently it's
sufficiently formal, but it is not theoretical in the sense
that it is not general enough.
And it also doesn't, for example, distinguish between regular and
irregular verbs.
So it's a specification.
It's not a theory.
Yet you would expect the theory to be more general.
Okay.
That is it.
Okay.
Before we move on to cognitive technology, is there any
any questions at this point?
No.
Everyone is happy or too shy.
Okay.
Let's let's look at cognitive technology.
So this is a bit of a strange term.
So it's not something I don't know, a laptop
or a mobile phone.
the underlying reading is, is by Cecilia Hayes who's
a psychologist mostly to do with , she's mostly looked
at evolutionary psychology.
, she calls the same thing cognitive gadgets.
So I will use these two terms interchangeably.
Cognitive gadget, cognitive technology.
, and her starting point is one where people in
the past, psychologists in the past have talked about instincts
a lot.
So Steven Pinker, you know, well-known psychologist with lots of
popular books, talks about the language instinct.
And by that he means that language is something that's
innate, that is, , I don't know, other instincts,
the I don't know the sucking reflex that the a
newborns have, right?
They're born and immediately they start to suck.
There's not something they need to learn.
So it must be innate.
And this is called an instinct.
And he says language is an instinct that.
And people have argued for all sorts of instincts, the
instinct to imitate and to learn by imitation.
The instinct of mind reading.
Mind reading here just means that you figure out other
people's mental states from their behaviour, from their facial expressions,
and so on.
And this has been a mainstay of psychology, in particular
of what's called evolutionary psychology, which assumes that our cognitive
processes, our cognitive capabilities are evolved and basically haven't changed
since, I don't know, the Stone age or something
that, and also then explains how our cognitive capacities don't
quite fit the modern world because they're actually Stone age
and so on.
That's another story.
But the main claim is that it's all based on
instincts, and these instincts allow us to acquire certain cognitive
capabilities, and the instincts are innate, right?
They are not learned.
They're there from birth.
However, and Hayes has quite a number of examples, for
example, to do with imitation learning.
There's increasing evidence that these abilities are actually not innate,
and they're also much less general than previously thought.
Also, they vary from culture to culture, which again mitigates
against the claim that the innate and so on.
So this evidence for innate is becoming increasingly tenuous.
And instead, she argues, and certain psychologists have argued this
for a long time, that all you need is a
general learning mechanism.
And with that general learning mechanism, you can then acquire
all these different things.
They don't need to be innate.
Language doesn't need to be innate.
Some aspects of language we know are not innate.
For example, reading.
Reading is historically very young.
It's about 5000 6000 years old reading and writing.
So this cannot be the result of evolution, right?
Biological evolution.
It cannot be innate.
And why not assume that the rest of language is
also not innate?
So and this is also theoretically driven.
So people who've used, for example, neural network modelling, they
traditionally argue against ineptness because a neural network of course
is one of these powerful general learning mechanisms.
So they want to use that to explain it.
But what's the what's the alternative.
Right.
So how do these cognitive capabilities evolve even if we
don't assume they are innate?
And how are they transmitted from one generation to the
next.
So the assumption there is then that they are culturally
transmitted, right?
Language is obviously learned from one generation to the next.
Parents talk with their children.
The children then talk to their children and so on
and so on and so forth.
So cultural evolution offers an additional or alternative mechanism for
transmitting cognitive capabilities.
And this is what Hayes calls cognitive gadgets or cognitive
technologies.
And these can be representations.
So for example I don't know kinship system is can
be represented as a tree or as a graph.
A food chain is obviously a sequential structure.
So it can be representations this maps for example.
But they can also be capabilities.
Navigation language.
Numeracy.
So the ability to count and to estimate quantities.
So in her world all of this is acquired through
a general learning mechanism and is transmitted through cultural transmission
from one generation to the next.
Rather than being hardwired in our DNA so it's not
innate.
Of course, you have to assume some innate stuff, right?
For example, this general learning mechanism, whatever it is, has
to be innate.
Otherwise things wouldn't work.
And so how does the cultural transmission happen?
Through interaction and communication.
Right.
You interact with your peers.
You interact with your parents.
And so you acquire all this stuff.
And then the question is language itself.
Is that a cognitive technology as well.
And this is something we'll discuss in more detail throughout
the course.
, probably it has aspects that are innate and aspects
that are not.
Language is special because it's the vehicle of a lot
of cultural transmission.
Right?
We transmit things by speaking, by writing it up and
so on.
So this is just a diagram that illustrates that a
little bit.
So cognitive technologies would be things this is supposed
to be a kinship hierarchy.
This is supposed to be a representation of, you know,
solar system and motions of of of planets.
This is supposed to represent navigation, which is a cognitive
skill.
This is supposed to represent the, , a food chain
and understanding of how food chains work.
So the sun and then there's grass, and then there's
an insect and and the toad and so on.
, and then at the centre of all of this
is language.
And language, of course, allows us to express all of
this, right?
Maps can be explained in language.
Concepts time can be explained in language.
Numbers and reasoning with numbers.
And of course we can also write it down and
transmit it, even if it's not direct from person to
person or from parent to child and so on.
So language in some sense is at the centre of
this.
And all these ideas about cultural transmission of cognitive technology
wouldn't work without language, communication, interaction and so on.
So this is trying to illustrate this.
Here's our child.
The child here is an utterance three koalas.
But at the same time of course they they see
the koalas most of the time.
And that way they construct these representations that we talked
about.
And the cognitive technologies ultimately are the representations that are
being built up.
And they construct them.
And then hopefully at some point they can utilise them.
And this is just a quote to to sort of
summarise what I've said.
So humans have created technology, physical machines, right?
We know this of course.
And the cognitive gadgets are the mental equivalent of this.
Right.
Are structures and processes and so on that we've we've
acquired over many generations of cultural evolution.
That's that's Hay's claim at least.
And, , they basically extend our mind, just tools
extend what our body can, can do.
And she calls them gadgets to distinguish them from instinct.
Instincts is what people have called them so far and
transmitted through cultural evolution rather than genetic evolution.
Biological evolution.
And this also it makes an important prediction, and one
that hasn't been tested yet, that people can adapt their
cognitive functions fairly easily.
Right.
If you assume it's all innate, it's all in the
DNA.
It was all fixed 100,000 years ago.
Then we have trouble adapting to a changing environment, right?
And there's obviously new stuff coming out all the time.
Smartphones, internet, ChatGPT and so on.
If you take the traditional evolutionary view, then it should
be really hard for us to adapt to this.
But under Hayes's view, with the way it's culturally transmitted,
it is fairly easy for new cognitive skills to emerge
and then pass down from one generation to the next.
Right.
They don't have to be encoded in the DNA.
And the process might look something this.
So the the adults here, they have a certain counting
procedure that allows them to say three koalas.
The child initially doesn't share this counting procedure, but then
ultimately through the interaction is able to basically reconstruct.
This is just a little bit of code here, but
whatever it looks.
It looks in the brain they're able to reconstruct
this way.
So the cognitive technology would be the representations and processes.
Cognitive artefact would be the linguistic signal.
So here I'm saying three koalas.
And then the environment is there's the teacher.
And we can also see the three koalas.
Right.
And then we're interacting with the environment.
This would not work with speech alone.
Without any visual input.
Without any interaction presumably.
Okay.
Short quiz on cognitive technology.
Okay.
So choose your cognitive technology.
Here is a number of candidates.
And are you supposed to just tap on on the
ones that you think are our cognitive technologies numbers are
the cognitive technology, language time, reading and writing and so
on.
And so forth.
You know.
I think.
This is this.
Is.
Okay, let's have a quick look.
Numbers.
Definitely cognitive technology.
Right.
And most people wouldn't think that numbers are innate.
So that's something that we acquire.
We acquire the number system.
Language , would be a bit less clear.
Probably some aspects of language are innate.
.
You can see this, for example, by the fact that
we are the only species that has has language.
So something must have happened in our brains to enable
that.
But the truth is, we don't know for sure.
Time.
That's a good question.
So again, if you look at other species, some animals
have a notion of time.
So possibly that's innate as well.
But it could also be a cultural technology.
Reading and writing.
Definitely cultural technology.
Right.
It's too young.
As I've said.
It's too young to be innate.
So it has to be cultural transmission.
Kinship terms probably also cultural technology because of the differences
between languages.
Sorry, between cultures.
In what kind of whether you have a special word
for, I don't know, the uncle of your uncle and
so on.
Food chains?
I'm not sure.
Could be.
Probably.
Probably.
Cognitive technology.
Trees?
No, but if you have a theory of trees.
I don't know how the different trees belong together.
Which ones are descended from each other, which ones are
edible, and so on.
Then maybe that becomes a cognitive technology.
Mountains?
No, but maybe a method for navigating them would be
cognitive technology.
Heliocentric model of the universe cannot be named, right?
So it must be a cognitive technology.
Maps also very likely, though some navigation skills might be
innate.
Koalas.
Again, this was a distractor.
Great.
And can you think of other cognitive technologies.
So let's see.
Yeah.
Just briefly.
We're almost out of time.
Yeah.
You can just write whatever you can think of and
I will show it as a close.
Yeah, I guess, but there are more tools.
Maths.
Definitely cooking.
Yeah.
Very good.
And, .
Whaling.
Yeah.
These are all great examples.
What's your.
Sense of rhythm?
could be innate.
Some kids, some animals have a sense of rhythm.
Logic.
Hunting.
Art.
Great examples.
We have to move on because we're almost out of
time.
So talking a little bit about language.
So that's sort of the million dollar question.
Is language also a cognitive technology which would present us
with a bit of a problem because language is obviously
also the vehicle for cultural transmission.
And here is of course the the Orthodox claim no
language is innate, right.
Language has remarkable complexity.
It is not specifically designed to accomplish a task.
So.
That is basically why animals don't have language, because they
don't have the innate capability and it's .
Doesn't require specific training.
I mean, kids don't speak from the beginning, but they
definitely speak before they enter school and learn to write
and other cultural skills.
So here it's the assumption that this is innate.
That's the only way to explain it.
That's sort of the orthodox view.
However, this is not sort of an armchair question, but
it's an empirical question, of course.
So we could look at genetic and neuroscientific evidence.
And Hayes in her in her article talks about this
a little bit.
People have until recently thought they had found a language
gene, a specific gene that if it's knocked out, you're
not able to acquire language, at least not fully.
However, there is now evidence that this gene does other
things as well, so we're not sure.
Animal communication.
You can teach chimpanzees and bonobos to some extent to
communicate.
They cannot speak, but they can sign.
Can teach some sign language to some extent.
Maybe that's an argument against Chomsky's claim.
, of course there are some things that are universal
across languages.
All languages have verbs, for example, but other things that
are different.
And in general, we have 6000 languages in the world
and they can really be quite diverse.
So that would be an argument against innate.
That's probably.
And one argument that we will quickly look at is
critical periods.
So for quite a lot of cognitive functions there's a
period during which it needs to be acquired.
Otherwise it goes away.
You're no longer able to acquire that function.
So for example, , the visual system needs to be
exposed to visual stimuli very early on.
Otherwise it doesn't develop properly.
And you can test this in animals.
So it's language that as well.
Does it have a critical period and there is pretty
good evidence for that.
, child versus adult language learning works quite differently, right?
Children learn the language automatically, whereas adults have to study
them in a classroom.
, non-native speakers versus native speakers.
They sound different.
They make mistakes.
If they're non-native speakers, they have an accent.
The age of immigration to a new country often determines
whether you end up as a native speaker or not,
and so on.
, if you arrive before six, generally you end up
as a native speaker.
If you arrive after puberty, generally no longer.
Then there's evidence from feral children and so on, and
I won't have time to go into that.
But here's an interesting diagram from a relatively recent study
where the authors, , gave speakers of English a test.
This is a grammatical test that basically gives you a
bunch of sentences and asks you, are these sentences correct
or not?
and then counted the accuracy here on the y axis
is the accuracy on this test.
M here in red are the native speakers of English
as the mother tongue.
And here on the y axis is the age.
So as you can see from the age of 1215,
something that, they use they get maximum performance on
the test.
And only in the native speakers show that.
However, people who start learning the language at the age
of two, at the age of five, at the age
of eight, and so on, they get very close to
native performance and then older age of onset started learning
English at 11.
At 1417 you are less and less close.
And then if you start as an adult, 17, 23,
29 and so on, then you don't reach native performance
anymore.
So that seems to be indicating that there is a
critical period and is actually a bit longer than people
have previously thought.
It's maybe until the age of 11 or 14 or
something that.
Then, as I said, there is also evidence from language
deprivation.
So this is children who were deprived of language input.
And it's obviously very heartbreaking, but also very interesting from
a linguistic point of view.
So Jeannie is a is a famous example who was
basically abused by her father and tied to a chair
until she was rescued at 13 and she knew only
a few words.
And then, of course, the linguists try to see is
she able to learn language after 13?
And the answer is really the.
She learned quite a lot of words, but she didn't
really learn sentence structure.
She didn't learn syntax.
It's hard to interpret these case studies because there is,
of course, deprivation.
There is other mental faculties that are affected.
It's not just language.
And it's hard to, , to generalise, but anecdotally at
least, that would be evidence for a critical period as
well.
And so the existence of the critical period.
Why is that interesting?
It's interesting because it indicates that language may be innate,
or aspects of language at least may be innate.
If you want to find out more about geni.
Here's a link that has explanations, videos, all sorts of
things.
Okay, we're out of time.
Here's a graphical summary of the of the lecture.
Any questions before I let you go?
Yes, please.
You can also come to me after class.
Thank you.