Okay, that's ten past.
Now the red lights.
Come on.
So, , good to see lots of people here today.
Let me just put this on here.
So, as you should know, if you've been paying attention
in lectures and reading the emails, this is not a
normal one B session.
, and I think I've talked a little bit about
why we're doing this, because what we're doing in first
year is preparing you for the rest of your time
in university.
And most of what that means is, is building up
the coding skills and the technical skills you're going to
need in later years.
But also really important part of that is building up
the other skills that you're going to need in in
later on in your degree and as you go into
your career.
So one thing we hear all the time from employers
is that it's not that hard to find people with
really good technical skills, but people who have really good
technical skills and also are good at the kind of
more reflective staff are good at teamwork, are good at
all.
The kind of interaction stuff is much more difficult.
So what we're trying to do here is to help
you build up a bit about this and help you
think about your pathways through uni.
So you should, I hope, be prepared for this to
be a two hour session.
We're going to have lunch about halfway through.
, I have been in touch with, , calculus lecturer
to let him know that most of you will be
coming to the second one today, rather than the first
one.
Obviously, if you have to go, there's a timetable clash
or whatever.
That's fine.
, but hopefully that will work out for most of
you.
And, , yeah.
So it's it's all about interaction.
So make sure you're sitting near people.
, it's actually great if you're sitting near people that
you don't hang out with all the time.
But if you're sitting there, your pals, that's that's okay
as well, right?
, so I haven't got any of the normal stuff.
I actually thought I maybe I should have brought part
of the lecture, but I haven't done that.
, so I will do double pat of the lecture
on Thursday.
, I actually saw in some of the I'll go
through the feedback as well from last week on Thursday.
I saw in the comments that somebody suggested we should
do a pet of the lecture competition to see who's
got the best pair.
I have to say I'm a bit dubious about that.
I think all pets are the best pair.
This is very subjective.
I'm not sure I can encourage ranking of pets, but
we'll see.
Maybe there's something fun we can do with that.
But anyway, most of the time today adds a nice
change for you.
Is not going to be me talking out to you.
It's going to be you talking amongst yourselves a lot.
But also the session is going to be led by
Becca from careers.
So some of you probably already come across Becca.
Becca is the person in careers who specialises in informatics.
So she you do drop in sessions and informatics and
all sorts.
Right.
And she's specialised.
She's a strong word.
I mean she's a specialist in informatics career.
I'm going to go that far.
So yeah.
So Becca is going to be leading the session and
we're ready to get started.
Yeah.
Let's do it.
Great.
It is so lovely to come into a room full
of people this size.
And you are actually all chatting to each other.
And part of that was probably those annoying and slightly
weird slips that I gave you to talk about.
But I think partly it's probably because of the energy
you bring into these sessions anyway.
So awesome.
, what we're doing today is called Life Design at
Edinburgh, and it's part of a program which developed at
Stanford University.
So a couple of design engineers.
So Bill Bennett, who I think was responsible for the
mouse on Apple laptops quite a long time ago, also
has designed some Star Wars toys.
, Bill Bevins, who is more of the marketing side
but I think was a partner at Electronic Arts.
They both found themselves at Stanford University and they were
running design product design courses, basically.
And they always had students coming to their office hours
saying, what am I going to do when I grow
up?
What do I do next?
How do I work out what it is that I'm
supposed to do next?
And these two guys got to thinking, well, how about
if we support students to use the same logic that
we use for designing products and services and tools, and
we turn that into a methodology that people can use
to design their lives.
And it is a it's now a class at Stanford,
an an elective class, and offered to students at all
levels.
There's been quite a lot of research on this class
at Stanford, but the people who take the course feel
more in control of the career choices in front of
them, which is quite exciting from someone from a career
service perspective to say, look, there's some evidence that this
stuff works, so that's quite exciting.
There's also a series of books that they've written, and
in the last year and a half, it's become a
course at the University of Edinburgh in a lot of
different formats.
I got to go and train at Stanford, except it
wasn't at Stanford.
And Fiona, they wouldn't pay me to go to
California.
I had to sit in my own home on Californian
time.
Exactly.
But.
But it was still pretty fun.
It's quite a high energy, kind of interactive.
Course we've taken it.
We're turning it into something that we hope is warm
and and fuzzy and friendly for you guys.
So we're hoping that the tools that we're going to
cover today are all about getting more out of your
time at university, more than rather than cramming more in.
When we look at things student surveys or feedback.
People are often saying, there is so much.
There's so much that I need to do.
There are things that I need to do that are
part of my course.
And oh, other people are part of societies, and they're
also doing internships, and they're also building projects and they're
also doing all this other stuff.
How do I navigate through that so that I know
I'm doing what's going to be useful and helpful for
me?
So there are a couple of kind of motivators there.
, introducing ourselves.
Sorry.
Thankfully, you know what Fiona looks .
, as Fiona has already said, I'm part of the
career service.
I'm the link consultant for the School of Informatics, and
what that really means is I get to do stuff
this.
But I also work with students across the university.
Do you want to do your own other introduction, or
are you confident they know who you are?
And what I would for you to do now
is to introduce yourself to someone who you don't know
already.
So this might involve turning around behind you or in
front of you.
These chairs swivel, which makes this quite interesting.
If you are surrounded by people that you know, be
brave.
Stand up and walk over to somebody that you don't
know.
And what we just you to do in three
minutes or less, we might see how we do is
tell the person a story, what your name is and
a story about your name.
So, for example, my story about my name is, my
name was Rebecca Casey.
I got married to a guy called Mark Jones.
I was going to keep my name, but then we
moved into a flat in Oxford, and he got court
summons for everyone else.
Ever.
Who'd ever been called Mark Jones, who owed money to
Oxford City Council.
So we decided to squish our names together because no
one else has got that name, so we won't be
taken to court.
Fiona, do you have a name story?
, I don't think I've got a very interesting name.
Sorry, Fiona, this is a it's an Anglo-Saxon of a
Gaelic word, Fiona, which means white or pale.
So it used to be something.
This is where the word fair comes from.
It used to, as a really positive adjective for a
woman, beautifully fair.
But of course, nowadays being super pasty and white
is not quite such a positive attribute.
But that's where Fiona comes from.
It's not a proper Gaelic name, but it's a kind
of anglicised Gaelic name.
And my my surname McNeill, obviously, that's a Highland name
and I really my name, but people always spell
it wrong.
Even people I've known for 20 or 30 years
spell it with one L and it drives me up
the wall.
So always remember it's got two owls in it and
then I'll be happy about it, right?
Fair.
Two L's got it sorted.
Okay, I'm going to start a timer.
And I would you to try and find as
many people as possible to share your name story with.
So start with the people next to you, but then
stand up.
Move around before the timer goes off.
Okay.
Go.
Why?
Am I doing this?
It's quite good, isn't it?
Yeah.
The next time we give them a time, they'll sit,
sit, sit, and then we can.
Okay.
I hate to interrupt what sound really good conversations,
but if you want to slowly kind of move back
to where you were sitting, that would be great.
Definite extra bonus points.
Bonus points there to the people who are now walking
back to their seats, because it meant they went to
find someone they didn't know already.
Which is exactly what we want here.
Fab!
Stop.
Great.
Thank you very much for sharing.
So little bit of an overview of some of the
stuff we're going to do today.
We've got three activities that we're going to focus on.
Will break for lunch in the middle.
Probably these things aren't going to mean very much yet.
So I'm going to start to tell you about them.
So let's start by thinking about this idea of design
thinking.
So what do we actually mean when we talk about
design thinking?
And to start there, we can think about different kinds
of thinking and the way that we might compare them.
So we've got engineering thinking.
Now engineers are often thinking, how can I build the
best version of this?
How can I build the strongest bridge or the fastest
car?
How can I solve my way forward by building stuff?
So we say that engineers think by a lot about
engineering.
Thinking is about solving problems.
Business thinking is about optimising your way forward.
So it's about thinking what are the levers that I
can pull?
What are the factors that will make my business more
profitable or increase my customer base?
Thinking about those little incremental pieces to optimise my way
forward.
Now, within research thinking, quite often people are analysing their
way forward.
So they're about isolating variables.
What's going on here?
What makes a difference?
How can we understand how we can move our way
forward?
And then what makes designers different is they are building
their way forward.
So they're trying stuff.
So rather than analysing rather than optimising, rather than trying
to find the best possible option, what designers do is
they do stuff and they see if it works and
then they do some other stuff.
Any resonance, Fiona, between those four different kinds of thinking,
where would you put yourself?
Mr. Tennyson.
I mean, I think that certainly when you're thinking about
coding, there's all kinds of combinations of these involved in
that.
I mean, certainly it's all about engineering, but, , I
think, yeah, the idea of analysing where you are, where
you're at, and I'm trying to talk about this a
lot in the course, in the course of when
things don't go wrong, it's when things don't go right.
You have to think strip it back and do
that analysis.
, but maybe the design thinking is stuff that we
do less.
And probably for me personally, I guess I don't do
that as much.
I do a lot of research thinking and engineering thinking,
but maybe not as much design thinking as I maybe
should do.
Yeah, yeah, I would agree.
I think I come from a consulting or a business
background before I moved into this kind of work, and
sometimes I'm in a university setting and I'm trying to
say, but how can we make this just a little
bit better?
How can we make more students come?
How can we get slightly better on the feedback form
rather than this?
Just let's try it and see what happens and see
what the result is.
So that's what we're we're doing that a little bit
now right with this.
So we've we've used to run a lot of these
as separate events, standalone events.
And it was really hard to get students to come.
And then we thought, well actually this is a fundamental
part of what we want our students to be learning
in first year.
This is a core part of education, and so we
ought to have it in a in a lecture context
in your normal teaching rather than rather than separately.
So now we're seeing how it goes.
So so far I'm pretty happy because there's a lot
of people here.
So what is design thinking.
We're going to look really briefly at the way designers
work and the way designers think.
And then we're going to start looking at some of
the tools that we can use to design our own
lives, careers, time at university.
So this process is probably one you're actually reasonably familiar
with, if you think about it.
If we start with this empathise step, if we're designing
something, we need to empathise with the people who are
going to use it.
So if I was going to make a new pair
of trainers, I would want to start by saying, well,
I need to understand what's going on for people who
buy trainers or people who wear trainers.
What do they want from that?
What are the problems with the trainers that they already
buy?
If I was going to design an app or a
game or a tool, I would want to think, well,
who's going to be using this and understand a lot
more about them in life design?
The user is us.
So actually we have to empathise with ourselves.
So a lot of the parts of the life design
program are about self-reflection, about understanding what's going on for
you, what's important to you, what do you want to
take forward, what do you want to do less of?
We then move into that defined stage, and I think
that also marks out designers as working in quite a
different way in that really understanding the problem is key.
If you are jumping to a solution before you've taken
time back to say, what am I actually trying to
do here?
And when we're thinking about our lives, IVs.
Making sure that we're focusing on problems that we can
actually fix is really important.
Making sure we're focusing on problems which open up possibilities
rather than no, I can't do that because or that's
not an option for me because is really important.
And we move into this ideation stage rather than jumping
to the solution.
We're thinking, what are all of the wild and interesting
and flexible possible ways that we could solve this problem
of how do we spend our time at university?
What do we want to do with our lives?
What happens next?
And by thinking really broadly there, you're opening up lots
of different possibilities.
We've got some ideas and then we want to test
them.
But you know, architects for example, they don't test things
by building an entire building.
They test things by making a tiny, tiny cardboard model
and seeing if it blows over in the wind and
looking at the angles and parking little cars in the
car park and things that.
And there are lots of different prototypes that we can
do with the things that we're curious about with our
own lives, and then we choose those deeper things to
test.
How do we get more data to enable us to
move forward?
And then that accept button at the top is probably
one of the most important ones.
It's about accepting when we've tried something.
What's the data?
What does that tell us?
What do we do now?
And also when it comes to life and career, it's
accepting that we live in the real world.
However much I may want to be an Olympic gold
medal link, medal winning gymnast, I think the time has
passed for me to do that.
I think even a really good exercise regime would not
fix that problem for me.
So I need to accept that and focus on something
that is achievable.
So today we're largely going to be having a look
at some of those early stages of that process.
So around empathising with ourselves and defining the problem.
Now the other thing we want to do is start
to think a little bit designers.
And there are a range of mindsets or approaches or
ways of working.
And I think they're the few that are going to
be really important for us are this ideal of radical
collaboration.
Basically, the principle that the best idea for you could
very easily come from somebody else.
So how do we build groups of people around us
who can advise us and find connections and help us
to define the problems we're facing and come up with
really good ideas?
That that mindset of curiosity is probably quite self-explanatory, but
it's really important going in and saying, how might I
do all of these kinds of things?
What might be out there?
What would be interesting to me?
And then that reframing, that idea of saying, what am
I doing that I could look at from a different
angle in order to move on?
But we'll look at those in more detail in a
bit later.
So.
The other thing I want to say before we jump
into the first activity is that We get so few
opportunities in life to talk about ourselves, and we get
so few opportunities in life to even think about ourselves.
And this is one of those and sometimes what we're
going to ask you to share or to think about
today might be quite difficult.
It might feel weird to talk about things that you've
done in the past with other people.
And what I'm just going to urge you to do
is to think, can I learn anything from doing this?
Can I stretch myself slightly outside of my comfort zone
in order to be able to get some help or
support or connections or ideas from other people?
So we've run versions of these courses in lots of
different places, and the feedback is always really interesting, but
challenging in a positive way, or some other words in
those kind of connections.
So just that idea of stretch yourself.
If it feels a bit uncomfortable, go with it, see
what it's afterwards, but obviously set your own boundaries.
If there are things you don't want to talk about,
you don't want to share.
If someone asks you a question, you could just say
no.
Don't want to talk about that.
Does that all seem okay for everyone?
A few nods, that's helpful.
Couple of other things is I would urge you to
consider distractions in your pockets or in your hands, or
on your desks or in your bags are amazing technologies
designed by incredibly clever people directly to draw your attention
to them.
Those people are awesome and clever, and one day you
might be part of that.
Those technological companies who are drawing our time and our
attention and our money.
But what I would you to do in this
session is just say, do I want to be distracted
by this right now?
So we have printed out workbooks, and for the rest
of this session, you don't need your laptop.
You will need your phone at the end.
And you're welcome to use your phone to take photos
or notes or anything, but challenge yourself to turn off
notifications.
Close laptops.
Close screens.
Focus on yourself and on other people.
Okay.
Any questions about that before we start?
Cool.
Okay, so the first thing we're going to do is
an activity called experience maps.
So this comes from the idea of empathising with ourselves,
of spending a little bit of time just thinking about
what you've done in the past and why it's important
for the future.
What are the connections and the ideas?
So what I'm going to ask you to do in
a little bit is to find the this document, which
we've got some student helpers who will come and hand
you one if you haven't got one already.
We'll do that in a minute.
Yes, we've got pens.
So if anyone's got their own pen, that would be
ideal.
We have got.
No, we, we've got some pens, but if you've got
a pen, if you can share a pen with someone
else, that would be great.
We have got some we can move through.
So I'll give you just a minute to make sure
that you've got a piece of paper.
So if you don't have the workbook, maybe waive and
one of the student helpers will come and hand out
those for us.
Have you got the other pack?
No.
That's just.
I'm .
Okay.
So I'm going to tell you a little bit more
about what we're going to do with this paper that
we've just given you and our , student facilitators.
Maybe you could come around with some pens and just
check that everyone has pens that they need them.
That would be wonderful.
Thank you.
Have they got the books?
Yeah, they're around here.
Pen, go.
Could you hand out some of those?
Great.
Thank you.
Okay, put your hands up.
You can wave if you need a pen.
Great couple down there.
Great.
So, , there's some in a box that also.
Has, I think.
Okay, so before everyone gets started and I can see
people with pens poised already, I'm going to explain a
little bit more about why we're doing this activity and
why we're doing it in this way.
Okay, everyone listen.
So if I were to ask you, tell me about
the meaningful experiences that you've had.
Tell me about the memorable things that have happened to
you.
Then you would probably come up a list of those
things that are probably quite big and quite significant.
So they might be I took these exams or I
moved to Edinburgh to start studying, or I was elected
captain of the cricket team or whatever it happens to
be.
There'd be things that felt quite substantial.
They might also be challenging things, you know, illnesses, things
that might have happened with with family, but possibly it
wouldn't be the kinds of things that you would come
up with, wouldn't.
The things you came up with wouldn't necessarily be the
things that have had the biggest influence on the decisions
that you've made.
So before we start mapping out what you've done over
the last few years, I want you to start by
thinking about what experiences have been meaningful for you.
So examples here.
So things that late night conversation with somebody that
you had that made you think, oh, actually, maybe I
could come and study computer science.
Maybe it was a really interesting book that you read
that made you think, okay, well, I want to go
and travel to this country.
I want to move in that direction.
Maybe it was something that went wrong or something small
or immaterial, that actually has been quite influential in the
way that you think or the way that you address
things.
So what I would you to do is on
the piece of paper which looks this with the
four squares.
I would you to spend five minutes, which is
a really long time by yourselves, making a note of
what are the meaningful experiences that you have had over
the last however many years you want to think about?
And these are a couple of examples from from other
students.
So they're thinking about things hobbies.
This one at the bottom there they have a talk
from a pilot at their school, which made them start
to think about what they wanted to study.
Mechanical engineering came out of that idea that it was
someone who came to their school.
And we've got an example up here of, obviously, a
conversation with a teacher, which was influential in what you
were going to choose.
We've got someone down here who was thinking about, actually,
they're just telling us they used to watch a lot
of documentaries on the Discovery Channel, and actually that has
led to career making decisions.
So we're not thinking about just things which have been
helpful in choosing courses, but just anything that when you
look back at your life, it feels meaningful.
I'm going to start a timer for this exercise.
It's a kind of personal reflection, so it's probably best
to just give yourself the time to reflect on that.
Before we get going, does anyone have any questions?
I've got a question.
Yeah.
Can you explain about the four different boxes with the
symbols?
Yes.
So they should have labels as well.
So you can use these categorisations or not.
But the Categorisations are helping you to think really broadly
about all aspects of your life.
So you've got one section there which is for play
or fun.
What are the things that you've done which have been
entertaining or interesting or fit into that kind of category?
You've got one section which is about work or study.
You've got one section which is about relationships or connections,
or in the the book version they call love.
You can interpret that however however you wish, but it's
about connections with people.
And then there's another section which is about health and
we mean mental, physical health.
Anything that for you fits into those kinds of categories.
It can be quite helpful to think.
Can I get a few meaningful experiences in all of
those boxes as a prompt to move forward?
But if all of your meaningful experiences are in one
box, that's fine too.
Okay.
Any questions?
So I will start a timer.
, there we go.
I love this one.
Okay.
So we're thinking about personal reflections.
So fine to share with other people, but give yourself
time to think about your own personal reflections.
Okay, just remembering this bit.
You're mostly supposed to be reflecting on your own stuff.
Not chatting too much.
There's going to be loads of time for chatting about
what you're thinking about later on, but right now, just
think on your own about yourself primarily, okay?
I only got another a minute and a half left.
Okay.
Pop your pens down.
How did you find that?
I think obviously I walked around.
There were lots of people having different ways to approach
that.
Did anyone find that easy?
Yeah.
Okay.
No.
Okay.
So nobody found that easy.
It wasn't suddenly that there were a list of instant
things that you considered to be memorable.
That came through.
Okay.
Anyone find it particularly hard?
Yeah.
Okay.
Okay.
So what I'm going to ask you to do now
is to go back to that list and to start
to add those experiences to the map.
So on the back there.
So hopefully by separating them out, rather than saying, well,
just tell us what you've done, tell us what's happened
and thinking about those things chronologically.
Just encouraging you to reflect on how those things fit
together.
So you can see on that printout at the back
you've got previous years, which can be as many or
as few as you want to include in that definition.
You've got last year and you've got this year if
you want to use the margins, if you want to
use the notes page, then that's fine.
But what I would you to do is go
through those meaningful experiences and just plot them onto the
map.
So what happened?
Where?
What happened when?
If you've got coloured pens, you could use that.
But I'm guessing not many people have at this stage.
And then as you're doing that, you might start to
notice themes.
Connections.
Did did one meaningful experience lead to another?
What were the patterns that you can see?
So as you're adding those things chronologically, I just want
you to have in the back of your mind what
was going on here, what's important.
And if you can identify things that happened deliberately or
things that happened kind of accidentally, then that might be
useful information to have as well.
So any questions?
Yeah.
Most of the problems that you have.
So I've got a couple of examples.
That's a really good question.
So you can do it in however make sense.
So this is an example.
This is a second year mechanical engineering student who actually
gave us one of those examples at the beginning.
And he decided to put those things on.
And he's drawn some different arrows.
So actually he's used those colours.
And we've got this bit of a health thing going
on here.
So it seems a broken leg in the middle
of first year or the middle of second year was
a bit of a health downer there as well.
We've got this development here.
So who's talking about this talk we're talking about then
leading to mechanical engineering.
And then he's talking about joining formula student and the
kind of impact of that too.
So you can leave this final column which is the
what next column.
You don't need to focus on that unless anything comes
up.
But go back and have a look.
I think there's a few more examples.
So this person is just arranged them kind of thematically.
And again, someone there, I think we must have had
lots of pens on that day.
So they put those together.
Does that make sense?
Yeah.
Great.
Right.
Okay.
Any other questions on that one?
Okay.
I'm going to give you three minutes.
This timer hasn't got music.
It's just a silent one.
So as you're going think, do you music?
Do you not?
And then we'll adjust a bit later on.
Okay.
Three minutes to put things on your map chronologically and
find the connections between them.
Well, then.
That's not very nice.
Wow.
Okay.
Okay.
Oh.
, okay.
Good.
Is that better or not working?
Won't be.
I will time this one on my phone and give
you updates.
So, again, probably largely a personal reflection.
Lots of chances to talk about it later, but give
yourself a little bit of time to really think about
what you've done in the past and what's meaningful for
you.
184.
I think.
It's more than I get.
That is less than.
Cool.
I just want to see it that.
Yeah.
Just.
One more minute.
Just to add to those meaningful experiences in chronological order.
And notice anything that's going on there.
So.
What is that all about?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
Before my phone beeps the time we're at us.
That's the.
End.
Oh!
Damn it!
There we.
Go.
So that's the end of that three minute process.
Now, it was clear from across the room there were
some people for whom that felt a little bit weird
or a little bit uncomfortable anyway.
And that's really interesting.
But if I was going to give you a bit
of a thought about why it's worth doing that, it's
worth thinking in detail about what you've done in the
past.
It's worth spending time on saying, how did that happen?
Why did that happen?
Are there things that you can reflect on?
Things that have gone really well, things that have gone
that have been more challenging, that you want to explore
or you want to take forward.
And when we're thinking of that big question, which is
why we're here today, which is how can you make
the most of your time at university, then how you
made the most of your time before you came to
university is going to be a really important factor there.
Coming in and saying, well, what have I done before?
What do I want to do more of?
What do I want to do less of what's new
and what's new and possible out there for me?
So we're going to move on to something slightly different
just before we break for lunch.
And that's to ask that big question, which is what
is university for?
Why are we here?
What is the point of getting up every single morning
and coming here?
So what I would you to do is just
scribble down on the back of the fourth bit of
paper there just an answer to this question.
So university will be a success if I just want
you to complete that sentence.
So write it down first and then share it with
somebody else.
So write yourself a note.
There's a page on the back that just says notes.
You can write it there.
Yeah that's great.
It's all there.
It's all wrapped up.
So we need a few minutes before.
Cool.
And then we'll move to the Guardian.
Ability to go out and do that.
Cool.
So this section could be reasonably short.
And when I actually get them up on their feet.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And they're kind.
Of.
Happening.
Right?
Yeah.
Cool.
Okay.
So is everyone written something down?
University will be a success if some people still writing.
Cool.
And then what I would you to do for
this one is I would everyone to stand up.
Take your piece of paper with you.
If you need it, leave your laptops, bags, everything on
the desks, you can come back to them.
I want you to stand up and find two new
people.
So people you haven't spoken to today.
And I just want you to tell them what success
at university would mean for you.
So everyone stand up.
We're going to be on our feet for a little
bit now, so just leave all your things coming into
the aisles.
Go and find somebody else to talk to.
Shall I go and start to tell them it's going
to be.
Another seven minutes?
Maybe.
Great.
Job.
So maybe turn to the people behind you to start
with.
That would be great.
Thank you.
Awesome.
What has to happen?
There's plenty of space at the front.
If it's easier to come around the front to have
these conversations, Please do.
.
Awesome.
Thank you.
Oh, no.
Thanks.
I'll put it here.
They'll come back for it.
That's amazing.
That's good.
Okay.
Thank you.
Again.
Really nice buzz in the room.
And again, thank you for everything.
Okay, everyone, you're listening.
Anita, I need a gong, don't I?
Or a whistle?
Maybe that would be good.
A whistle.
That'd be better at.
The Sound of Music.
Hello?
Is everybody listening?
Okay, so you've all had a bit of a go
at writing that personal understanding of what university is and
what it's for.
I'm going to get people to move again.
So if you're happy to stand where you are for
a couple of minutes, that would be really useful.
If you need to sit down, obviously do, but where
you are is fine.
So what we're going to look at now is a
series of university archetypes to help us kind of quantify
and reflect on why we're here, what's university for and
what's that what why, why, why are we here?
So the first of these is the life of the
mind.
So the idea that you are here and your purpose
of education is about Out intellectual pursuits.
It's about understanding knowledge.
It's about developing your capacity to understand knowledge.
So people who perhaps would fit into this universities for
the life of the mind, will be people who came
because they were really passionate about a subject, because they
want to develop expertise, because they want to contribute to
creating new knowledge.
So that's the life of the mind and the life
of the mind poster, which is going to be important
for later on, is over in that corner.
The second of these archetypes is career readiness.
So is university.
For the express purpose of helping you to develop skills,
knowledges, knowledge, experiences that are going to enable you to
launch fulfilling, exciting careers.
The third of these is primarily about self actualisation.
Is it about becoming you, understanding yourself, knowing what's important
to you, what you can do, your capabilities so it
might give you opportunities to expand on some of those
other things that fit into the university experience, travelling
or playing a sport.
And the fourth of those archetypes is that university is
about supporting ourselves and our communities.
So education is a key to social mobility, to building
better, more equal, innovative societies.
And also in this category might be that actually I'm
coming here to study because I think that people depend
on me.
So those four archetypes, there are four posters in four
corners of the room.
And what I'm going to do is I'm going to
read a series of prompts.
And I would you to answer the prompts by
moving closest to the poster, which I think matches this.
This is going to be chaos, and that's fine.
We're happy with.
Chaos.
So roughly speaking, we've got you in this corner.
So that kind of self-actualisation we've got supporting myself and
my community over here.
We've got career readiness over there.
And then we've got the other one, which I've completely
forgotten.
And someone's head's in front of it over there.
It's life of the mind.
Life of the mind.
Life of mind.
Okay.
Are we ready?
So the first prompt is, what do your family caregivers.
We use that term as loosely as possible to encounter
anyone who you might consider family.
What do they think the purpose of university is?
So all you need to do now is go and
stand next to the poster that you think sums up
what your family think the purpose of university is.
So careers over there, life of the mind at the
back.
They're becoming you.
They're.
And supporting your communities over there.
I mean, it's a one way system or
maybe yeah.
I think they'll get there.
But yeah, it's a good idea.
What if one parent is in one corner?
That's a really good question.
If they're split, if you're split and you want to
stand midway between two posters?
That's totally fine.
So the room is your oyster?
Exactly.
That's fine.
Differing views within your family.
You can stand between two different posters.
There's a lot of hesitation.
If you need to be in the middle, that's probably
okay.
But.
Okay, we're.
Going.
To go second down.
Yeah.
Okay.
Another few seconds to move to the right place.
Okay.
Now quite interesting.
If we were to plot this on a graph, we've
got a definite heap over there about career readiness, which
is really interesting.
I'm going to be super mean now, and I'm going
to pick on a few people to tell me why
you're standing where you are.
If you don't want to answer, you can just, you
know, blank me.
That would be fine.
So yeah, that's.
A good idea.
Cool.
So quieting down everyone because the microphones aren't that good.
Fabulous.
Okay, so we're just asking, why are you standing here
equidistant between them?
Tell us a little bit about that.
Well, well, my dad is very career orientated, so I
would be more on that corner.
But my mum wants me to become myself, so I'm
, yeah, I'm the.
Yeah.
In the middle.
Okay.
Awesome.
Thank you.
Great.
Okay, let's say someone from this big group over here
and it will be someone I can reach.
So everyone's avoiding my gaze.
Would you mind telling me a little bit?
Yeah.
No.
, I was trying to go in the middle over
there, but my mom is career oriented, and my dad
wanted me to, , learn new things and things
that.
Cool.
Awesome.
Great.
And I'm just going to come up to someone from
life of the mind over here.