University because you've got a different opinion to your friend,
or a different opinion to what's important to you.
It doesn't mean that you're getting it wrong or you're
here for the wrong person.
So if you can head out to lunch, considering that
that would be really useful, we will come back at
25 past.
So it's a pretty quick break.
So grab a sandwich, eat it, and then come and
head back in.
Okay.
Thanks very much.
Oh.
Okay.
Just cool.
Just an idea.
Okay.
I know that lots of people are still eating lunch,
but we'll get started so that we can leave on
time, which is always an advantage.
I hope this is.
Fun.
, there's that one.
Oh.
This one?
Yeah.
Okay, great.
So settle down.
I'm glad to see most people come back.
So I hope you enjoyed lunch.
Okay, that was chaos.
Next time we do this, I'm going to make sure
there's at least, , 3 or 4 different tables.
So not everyone's in the same queue.
So I'm sorry that you had to spend ages hanging
around, but hopefully everybody got a sandwich.
Almost everyone's back in.
, so let's get on with session.
Awesome.
Someone was just looking for a bin.
I don't think there are any in here.
So, just as a note, when you're leaving, if you
could take everything with us, it stops us from getting
into trouble with whoever is in the room next, so
that'd be great.
Yeah.
If anyone asks.
You didn't have any food?
No.
No food here.
Cool.
Fav.
Okay.
Right in.
Front of the.
Maybe it's an experimental sandwich.
Okay.
Great.
So just to bring us back into what we're doing,
having told you before the break to stop talking over
each other, I'm now going to tell you to talk
over each other.
So what I would everyone to do, probably not
of your mouth is full of sandwich is.
Take a minute and I'm going to start a timer.
And I want everybody to talk over each other and
do a really weird exercise, which is using different parts
of your brain.
So what I want you to do is point at
something and say something else.
So I might point at the ceiling and say floor.
I'm going to point at Fiona and say, Tuesday.
I'm going to put it in the computer and I'm
going to say water bottle.
Get the idea?
So we are switching our brains in a different way.
We're doing something the verbal equivalent of patting your head
and rubbing your tummy.
We're going to talk over each other, so it's going
to be really noisy for a minute.
Okay.
Few nods.
Okay, I will press the button.
Let's go.
Okay.
Awesome.
Thank you.
Bit of a weird one to break up the lunchtime
chat.
Okay.
Thank you.
So we're going to move on to that problem definition,
part of that cycle that we were thinking about before.
I will put it on display mode.
We're going to move on to that problem definition part
that was on before.
So we're thinking about once we have empathised with our
user and the activity, the activities we did today so
far are about understanding what's going on for you, what's
important, what's memorable, what's meaningful.
But also we then started to think about, well, why
are we here?
What's the problem that we're trying to solve?
So has anybody oh, I'd to just take a
minute to write down or think of something that you
are stuck on right now.
You probably won't need to share this in its entirety
with everyone else, so you can be honest.
So it could be something to do with your studies,
or your work life, or your social life, or a
hobby or something, but something that you at the moment
you're thinking, I don't know what to do about this.
I don't know what decision to make.
So just take a minute.
I'll just take a minute to jot that one down.
No, no, I can.
Do a lot more work.
First few did.
Though.
It was weird.
Yeah.
The.
Yeah.
The one with the fish.
Yeah.
So you've got a page in your workbook.
You've got a page.
And at the top you've got a space to write
this problem down.
So write it down on that page.
Again a personal problem you'll get to talk to about
it.
Two other people not doesn't need to be a personal
problem, but a problem that is personal to you.
So write that down.
Okay.
Great.
Okay.
So has anybody.
Has anyone ever heard.
Has anyone ever said this to you?
Has anyone ever said something , well, in order to
get a great job, you need to have an internship.
That's the only way that you're going to get a
great job if you're in the School of Informatics.
Few nods there.
That's something that you might have heard a few kind
of shaking hands up.
Definitely.
You've heard that.
You've heard that idea that there was one way to
get through a degree there.
Sometimes you're an expectation that actually I just need to
get the best grades.
That will be fine if I get on top of
the class in the grades that I am, then everything
else will fall into line for me.
But if you take that idea that there is one
kind of perfect way of going through university and all
you need to do is just find it and then
everything in your life will magically fall into place.
That's actually reasonably intimidating because it's you're stumbling around
in the dark going, well, how can I find this
magical right thing?
This direct route that's going to take me into this
job that I'm thinking about, or this life or this
happiness that I'm working towards.
And sometimes that can be a bit intimidating.
And what we want to think about actually is rather
than saying, how do I find the perfect view or
the perfect route for university?
Let me think about the layers that might be important
when making the decisions about what's what's useful.
Now having just had two videos that didn't play.
Wish me lots of luck on this.
And this is a recording from the philosopher Alan Watts,
and you may notice that the graphics share some similarity
with SouthPark, so we'll go with that.
It's just a really quick video introducing a concept that
we're going to talk about a bit.
In music, one doesn't make the end of a composition.
The point of the composition.
If that was so, the best conductors would be those
who play faster.
And there would be composers who wrote only finales.
People would go to concerts.
Just the one crashing chord, because that's the end.
But we don't see that as something brought by our
education into our everyday conduct.
We've got a system of schooling which gives a completely
different impression.
It's all graded, and what we do is we put
the child into the corridor of this grade system with
a kind of Come.
On, kitty, kitty, kitty.
And ah, you go to kindergarten, you know, and that's
the great thing, because when you finish that, you'll get
in the first grade and then come on, first grade
leads the second grade and so on.
And then you get out of grade school and you've
got high school and it's revving up.
The thing is coming.
Then you're going to go to college and buy a
job.
Then you get into graduate school, and when you're through
with graduate school, you go out and join the world,
and then you get into some racket where you're selling
insurance and they've got that quota to make, and you're
going to make that.
And all the time the thing is coming, it's coming,
it's coming.
That great thing, the success you're working for.
Then when you wake up one day about 40 years
old, you say, My God, I've arrived.
I'm there.
And you don't feel very different from what you always
felt.
And there's a slight letdown because you feel there's a
hoax.
And there was a hoax, a dreadful hoax.
They made you miss everything.
We thought of life by analogy with a journey, with
a pilgrimage which had a serious purpose at the end.
And the thing was to get to that end.
Success or whatever it is.
Or maybe heaven after you're dead.
But we missed the point the whole way along.
It was a musical thing, and you were supposed to
sing or to dance while the music was being played.
Outro music.
Is that.
Okay.
Had anyone seen that before?
What did you think?
Did that resonate with anyone?
Does anyone feel that pull towards something?
I've got to get this great thing.
I've got to lead towards this successful thing, whatever it
is.
Okay.
There's quite a lot of nods there, especially with people
eating sandwiches.
So I'm not going to ask you to expand on
it a little bit more, But I think that whole
idea that we're here for a purpose, that we're trying
to move through without getting too philosophical about it, can
actually start to define the way that we live our
lives and the opportunities that we choose to look for
or that we don't look for.
So actually, we just want to think about, well, what
can we do about that if we're coming in and
we're thinking, well, I'm being really driven by this, something
that I'm supposed to be doing in the future, that
I'm moving towards something.
What can we actually do to start focusing on the
things that we can control and the things that we
can take action on?
So thinking a designer, how do we build our
way forward rather than following this magical, predetermined path?
So we get this kind of dysfunctional belief here.
So dysfunctional belief.
We're basically saying anything that you believe or you think,
which is stopping you from taking action or stopping you
from feeling in control of your life.
So we've got this dysfunctional belief and we want to
reframe it.
So any one of us seen an artist or a
photographer kind of walking around here trying to put different
things in that act of reframing something.
Do we put in more of the background or less
of it?
Do we focus on one person or another?
Do we consider the context, or do we go for
a close up that enables us to look at a
situation differently?
So we're using this kind of analogy of reframing.
So a reframe of this dysfunctional belief of I need
to find out the best route through university, because that's
the only thing that's going to be successful.
We reframe that and we say, well, actually there are
multiple options.
There are lots of ways that I could build my
way forward into university and beyond.
So another dysfunctional belief that I hear quite a lot
in in the 1 to 1 appointments that I do,
internships are only open to second and third year students.
I can't get any experience this year.
And actually, if you reframe that to think about, well,
something that's called a formal internship, or maybe those programs
are mostly open for students, let's say, between third year
and fourth year.
But that doesn't mean there aren't things that you can
do to build experience, to understand what might be right,
might be right for you.
And by saying, well, I can't do that.
You're closing off options and by reframing it and saying,
well, how can I build these opportunities?
How can I build experience?
You're then building up layers of experience that are going
to be helpful for you.
So final one there.
So dysfunctional belief.
My coding skills are really strong compared to my classmates.
So that's it.
I'm going to find it really easy to get a
job, and I'm going to find it really easy to
progress.
And possibly for some people that's the case.
But in most scenarios, if you have that as your
central belief that because I'm great at one particular thing
or because my technical skills are really strong, everything's going
to be easy for me.
You're missing opportunities to develop different skills and experiences, to
explore things that you might even be better at than
this technical skill that you've decided as your expertise.
And actually, when you're thinking about what employers are interested
in, sometimes it's that technical skill set, but sometimes it's
everything else that goes around that it's your ability to
work with other people and your ability to solve problems
that's important.
If you choose to cut yourself off from experiences that
will help to develop, that, you might be limiting your
options.
Can I can I just jump in there?
Because one dysfunctional belief that I see a lot in
first year students with the ones who have less coding,
is that it's such a steep hill to climb, and
you're never going to catch up with the people who
are who are really good at coding.
And I think that's a totally dysfunctional belief, because for
a start, that in itself isn't true.
And and you do catch up and some of our
strongest students haven't got that experience to begin with, but
also because you haven't been doing computing in schools, you've
been doing other things.
And sometimes your your, your broader skills are really strong.
So, you know, it does create challenges, but it's certainly
so it's yeah, it's about reframing that that creates challenges.
But the dysfunctional belief is that you're always going to
be a step behind, and it's going to be harder
for you ultimately.
Yeah, yeah.
And I think anything we cross, anything is a dysfunctional
belief.
If it stops you from doing something, if it stops
you from taking action.
If you were saying, I'm never going to be as
good as the person next to me, what's the point
in trying?
You're cutting off opportunities for things that you could do.
So what I'd you to do is to consider
the problem that you've written down and think about first.
What type of problem is this?
So are you dealing with an anchor problem?
We have a nice little animation put together by the
intern we had last summer who designed our graphics, which
I think is quite nice.
So are you dealing with an anchor problem?
So an anchor problem is something that you can free
yourself from.
You can cut the chain of the anchor and you
can sail off into the sunset.
So an anchor problem is something that essentially is fixable.
But we also have.
gravity problems and gravity problems are things that.
However hard you try, you will never be able to
fix them.
So, for example, and I think I've got this example
on the next slide as well.
But if Google has a hiring freeze, there is very
little that you can do as an individual to get
hired in the middle of a hiring freeze.
If the industry or the sector that you work in
has disappeared because technology has replaced the function that people
used to do, there's probably not much you can do
as an individual to focus on that.
So what?
So I'm just going to put up a few different
problems.
And I'd you to just think about are these
gravity problems.
So something that could be fixed.
Something that I could move away from.
Or are they no other way around.
Are they gravity problems?
Something that is inevitable?
You cannot fight the forces of nature?
Or are they anchor problems that you could action?
So classic one.
I have heard this quite a lot.
I don't have time to practice leetcode.
I'll never pass an internship assessment.
So hands up if you think that is a gravity
problem.
Okay.
And hands up if you think it's an anchor problem.
Yes.
Great.
I think that one probably is an anchor problem.
And the angle that you take is quite interesting because
you could probably make time if you tried hard enough.
You could find or make time to practice that thing.
You could probably also look at organisations that don't use
leetcode and assessments.
You could start to talk to people where the relationship
you have with them as an individual is going to
be more important than the way that you're testing, the
way that they might test for technical skill sets.
Okay.
Only people with PhDs work in machine learning.
Anchor problem.
Gravity problem.
So who thinks it's an anchor problem and who thinks
it's a gravity problem?
And to a degree, you're probably both right.
Actually, there are some roles where at the moment, those
roles are being done by people who have PhDs.
It doesn't mean that will always be the case, but
it might always be the case.
And sometimes actually, whether something is a gravity problem or
an anchor problem is always going to depend on the
context or the circumstances in which you're working with.
Hiring freeze at Google.
I already told you the answer to that, but anyone
think that that's an anchor problem?
Because if you do and you have a solution, then
everyone wants to hear about it.
That would be awesome thing to market.
And the final one here, I want to live in
the Highlands, but I can't drive.
Anchor problem or gravity problem?
Anchor problem.
Gravity problem.
Which is why you can't drive.
Exactly.
And I think that's the thing.
So you could learn to drive.
But if you have a medical condition that means you
can't learn to drive, then for you it might be
a gravity problem.
You could work remotely and live in the Highlands, in
which case you could just stay at home.
Or you could think about other ways you could live
on a bus route.
So sometimes something is going to be an anchor problem.
Sometimes it will be a gravity problem.
So I want you to go back and look at
the problem that you wrote down before.
And I want you to do two things.
And the first one is say, is this for me
right now?
Is this a gravity problem or an anchor problem?
So what's going on here?
Is this something I can fix?
And then the second thing I want you to do
is rewrite that problem, starting with the sentence.
How might I?
So if you'd started your sentence with I can't find
any work experience for this summer, then just rephrase it
to how might I find some work experience for this
summer?
I can't choose from the courses that are available to
me.
How might I make that choice?
Anyone got any questions on that?
Okay, so I will set my phone timer for that
because the others are broken anyway.
I'll just give you two minutes, notice what kind of
problem it is and reframe it.
In fact, one minute.
I think we're short for time.
Exactly.
Are we going to do it?
Yeah, I think so.
So the part that we probably won't have time.
Okay.
Now, if if lunch hadn't been squished into a small
corridor on one table, what I would have asked you
to do now is to take your problem and to
find a group of people that you don't know and
ask them your question.
So how might I and what I really want you
to do after you leave this session in between before
when we meet again, which is in week eight, go
and ask some people that question.
So how might I meet Fiona in the corridor?
Ask her.
Exactly.
I have, you know, a really interesting lecture somewhere else.
Hang about and ask someone else who's running it.
And, you know, if you're perhaps at a SOC event,
ask someone who's doing something different or interest to you.
Ask people that you meet in every area of your
life over the next few weeks.
How might I address this problem?
So we'll just whip through the end of the session
so that everyone leads on time, because hopefully the how
might that how did you find that when we've run
that activity in different sessions, people have come back with
real ideas.
They've got really good ideas from the person sitting next
to you that they haven't thought about.
So I'd really urge you to take a little bit
of time and ask two people that question.
So I'm setting you optional homework, which is always optional
for what I would really you to do is
to go back and look at those experience maps, to
think about what you've done before, and then to try
and fill in that thin column at the end.
So that column at the end is for future possibilities.
So thinking about what do you want to do in
the future?
What do you want to do while you're at university,
and if you can come back with a few ideas,
then we'll be able to build on that next time.
I'm going to flash up this slide for you.
Here is a list of some of the ideas that
I have had.
But it's not even slightly comprehensive.
It's just a tapping at the surface of all of
the things you could do to explore your future possibilities,
future curiosities, or things that might be possible for you.
Okay.
Okay.
A few photos.
Of that.
But you always send it.
Out.
Yeah.
Yeah.
We'll also send that slide out so you'll have it
with you.
Okay.
So in the next session, if you've had a little
bit of time to fill out that curiosity column, you'll
get a little bit more time to expand on your
ideas, to ask other people for help and work out
three possible ways that you might use your time at
university.
What I'd really you to do before we go
is this is the first time that we have run
the session this for first year students within object
oriented programming.
It's the first time we've run a session this
with this many people in this kind of room.
It would be really helpful if you could take a
couple of minutes to complete this exit ticket and tell
us what you thought, what we can change, and then
it helps us to shape the session that we run
next time so that it's going to be useful and
helpful for you.
Cool.
And then whenever they've done that, anytime.
Thanks for coming along to that.
Awesome.
So thanks for coming along.
I hope you found that helpful.
So we're back to normal timetable from B until week
eight, Monday and week eight.
We're going to have the follow up of the session,
which I think you all find really useful.
Putting all those ideas into practice.
, but from but other than that, we're just back
to normal in from be teaching.
So come along to my office hour.
I'm bringing Oreos, and I will see you either this
afternoon or on Thursday.
Oh, and also feel free to take any of the
food if it's still there.
It's probably hoovered up by other people, but take whatever
you want.
If it's still there.
And take your rubbish with.
You.
And please take your rubbish out of the lecture theatre
and put it in the bins if there's any space
left in the bins.
If the bins are completely overflowing, put the rubbish on
the tables.
Oh, I'll leave that for a bit.
, well.
.